Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS)
(Handbook)
Delhi Police
Team
Delhi Police Academy
Edition - I
January 2024

FOREWORD
After having served as the fulcrum of criminal justice
administration for over 150 years, with several amendments and
upgrades, the erstwhile three Criminal Major Laws have recently
been replaced by Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam through
Acts of Parliament. The enactment of the three new Criminal
Major Acts marks a significant post-colonial shift in the criminal
justice administration of our country; the distinguishing feature
being focus on ‘justice’ from conventionally being purely ‘penal’.
The new laws aim at structural overhaul of criminal justice
administration by acknowledging the changes that have taken
roots in a developing country and society over the past century
and, are futuristic in-as-much as they aim at providing a
cohesive definition and prescribing the consequences of new age
delinquencies in a rational, just and nationalistic framework.
The new laws are expected to be notified for implementation in
the coming days. It is going to be a multi-stakeholder endeavour
wherein central organizations like NCRB, BPR&D etc. will play
an important role along with State Police forces. For on-ground 
understanding and implementation of the new laws, Delhi
Police has already taken the first step with the preparation of this
comprehensive Handbook, which shows the commitment and
perseverance of our Training Division, under the able leadership
of Ms. Chhaya Sharma, Spl.CP/Training.
The challenge with adoption and implementation of the new
laws is primarily ‘attitudinal’. For a police force accustomed to
learning, practicing and internalizing laws that have been the
‘daily bread’ of policing for generations of police officers, the first
challenge is to acknowledge that development is de-envelopment
i.e., the old yolk is to be done away with. The process of unlearning
and re-learning can indeed be very difficult in absence of
experienced mentors, quality study material and structured,
practical tutoring. The Handbook at hand aims to fill the critical
second paradigm mentioned above, while we scout and prepare
professional trainers and lay down a calendar for training over
seventy thousand personnel of Delhi Police on this journey of
excitement and discoveries.
I once again extend my heartfelt compliments to the
entire team of Training Division of Delhi Police, who worked
assiduously, ably assisted by experts drawn from various
professions into drafting the Handbook and I am sure that this
will serve as the beacon light for not just Delhi Police but several
other State Police forces, who are moving along with us into the
future of national service through our policing efforts.
Sanjay Arora
Commissioner of Police, Delhi
PREFACE
In the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita – 2023, there are total 358
Sections in 20 Chapters whereas there was modification of
total 511 sections in 23 + 3 Chapters in the I.P.C. where in
20 new sections have been added in BNS and 20 provisions
of I.P.C have been deleted. A committee was constituted
for preparation of course material for Investigating Officers
of Delhi Police and after much deliberation, this guide has
been made to help the Investigating Officers and simplify the
understanding of the new ‘Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita – 2023’
for the police officers of Delhi Police.
In this guide, you will find the newly updated sections
of BNS with five annexures which depict different types
of offences and their fines/punishments. The newly added
and modified sections have been highlighted and nature
of offence being Cognizable or Non Cognizable have been
given for ease of the readers.
Our goal is to make the shift smooth, offering practical
insights that empower you on the ground. As you navigate
this legal update, consider this booklet your go-to resource for
understanding and implementing these changes effectively.
Together, let us ensure a seamless transition, enhancing our
collective commitment to justice and community safety as
well as making Delhi Police one of the best organizations to
serve the society.
Team Delhi Police Academy
CONTENTS
1 Overview on BNS 8
Chapter Sections
2 Chapter I “Preliminary” Sec. 1 to Sec. 3 13
3 Chapter II “Of Punishments” Sec. 4 to Sec. 13 14
4 Chapter III “General Exceptions” Sec. 14 to Sec. 44 14
5 Chapter IV “Of Abetment, Criminal
Conspiracy and Attempt”
Sec. 45 to Sec. 62 16
6 Chapter V “Of offences against women
and child”
Sec. 63 to Sec. 99 20
7 Chapter VI “Of offences Affecting The
Human Body”
Sec. 100 to Sec. 146 28
8 Chapter VII “Of Offences against State” Sec. 147 to Sec. 158 44
9 Chapter VIII “Of Offences Relating To
The Army, Navy And Air
Force”
Sec. 159 to Sec. 168 47
10 Chapter IX “Of offences relating to
Elections”
Sec. 169 to Sec. 177 48
11 Chapter X “Of Offences relating
to coin, currency notes,
banknotes, and government
stamps”
Sec. 178 to Sec. 188 49
12 Chapter XI “Of Offences Against The
Public Tranquility”
Sec. 189 to Sec. 197 51
13 Chapter XII “Of Offences by or relating
to Public Servants”
Sec. 198 to Sec. 205 54
14 Chapter XIII “Of Contempts of the
Lawful Authority Of Public
Servants”
Sec. 206 to Sec. 226 55
15 Chapter XIV “Of False Evidence And
Offences Against Public
Justice”
Sec. 227 to Sec. 269 60
16 Chapter XV “Of Offences Affecting
The Public Health, Safety,
Convenience, Decency And
Morals”
Sec. 270 to Sec. 297 68
17 Chapter XVI “Of Offences relating to
Religion”
Sec. 298 to Sec. 302 73
18 Chapter XVII “Of Offences against
Property”
Sec. 303 to Sec. 334 74
19 Chapter XVIII “Of Offences Relating to
Documents and to Property
Marks”
Sec. 335 to Sec. 350 86
20 Chapter XIX “Of Criminal Intimidation,
Insult, Annoyance,
Defamation, etc”
Sec. 351 to Sec. 357 90
21 Chapter XX “Repeal and Savings” Sec. 358 92
22 Annexures I List of new sections and
partly added provisions in
BNS
93
23 Annexures II List of IPC sections, which
have been deleted/repealed
in BNS
103
24 Annexures III List of sections, in
which punishment of
imprisonment has been
increased in BNS
104
25 Annexures IV List of sections, in which
punishment of fine has
been enhanced in BNS
107
26 Annexures V List of sections, in which
Mandatory Minimum
Punishment introduced in
BNS
113
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
8 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
General Overview About
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 (Act No. 45 of 2023
Dated 25th December 2023)
•	 The new Act is called as“Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023”, (BNS) which has
replaced Indian Penal Code, 1860. The word code has been replaced with
Sanhita.
•	 In BNS, total 358 Sections in 20 Chapters whereas there were 511 sections
in 23 + 3 Chapters in IPC. Scattered provisions have been consolidated
in single Chapter. Also, definitions and punishment have been provided
in same section in many sections/ chapters, which resulted in change in
numbering of sections / chapters in BNS.
•	 The Chapters/sections for offences against women & children and offences
affecting the human body (murder) have been given precedence. Further,
the offences against women and children which were scattered throughout
in the erstwhile IPC have been brought together and have been consolidated
under Chapter-V. In the same manner, the offences affecting the Human
body are also brought up in the order and placed there after in Chapter VI.
•	 All 3 incomplete categories of offences, i.e. Attempt, Abetment &
Conspiracy are brought together in one Chapter (i.e. Chapter IV) which
were earlier in different chapters.
•	 20 New sections have been added. List of new sections and partly added is
at (Annexure-I). For example, Abetment of an offence committed in India
by a person outside India has now been made an offence u/s 48 of BNS.
Offence of Snatching has also been introduced u/s 304 of BNS. Also, Mob
Lynching, Organised Crime and Petty Organised Crime have been made
separate offences in BNS. A new Section 226 has been added in the BNS to
punish those who attempt to commit suicide with the intent to compel or
restrain the exercise of any lawful power by a public servant.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 9
•	 To tackle ‘organised crime’ and ‘terrorist acts, offence of organised crime
and terrorist act have been added in the Sanhita with deterrent punishments.
Sections 111 & 113 of the BNS 2023 punish the commission, attempt,
abetment, conspiracy of organised crimes and terrorist acts respectively.
Both the Sections also punish the act of being a member of any organised
crime syndicate or terrorist organisation, harboring or concealing any
person who committed any organised crime or Terrorist act and the act
of possessing any property derived or obtained from the commission of
organised crime or terrorist act. Section 111 on organised crime takes care
of various state laws enacted in this domain. Section 113 on terrorist act has
been drafted on the lines of UAPA. It has also been provided that in case of
the offence of terrorist act, officer not below the rank of SP will decide
whether to register a case under the provisions of BNS, 2023 or UAPA.
•	 A new offence for having sexual intercourse on false promise of marriage,
employment, promotion or by suppressing the identity etc. has been
introduced in Section 69 of the BNS. This provision will be a deterrent
for the people who employ deceitful means like false promise of marriage,
concealment of identity etc. to take consent of the woman and involve in
sexual intercourse. It aims to protect the rights of women.
•	 20 Provisions of IPC have been deleted. (Annexure-II). Offences like
Attempt to Commit Suicide u/s 309 IPC, Adultery u/s 497 IPC, Sedition
u/s124-A IPC etc have been deleted/ repealed as offence in BNS.
•	 Punishment of imprisonment has been increased in 33 offences.
(Annexure-III) Viz. in the offence of death by negligence punishable u/s
106(1) of BNS imprisonment has been increased from 2 years to 5 years.
Also, more punishment of imprisonment up to ten years and fine u/s 106
(2) of BNS for not reporting of death caused by rash and negligent driving
of vehicle and escapes from the place of incident without reporting has been
incorporated.
•	 A new provision 117(3) has been introduced in the BNS to provide stringent
punishment for such acts of grievous hurt which results in persistent
vegetative state or in permanent disability, it will attract higher punishment
of rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
10 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
but which may extend to imprisonment for life (remainder of that person’s
natural life) as against up to 7 years imprisonment for grievous hurt earlier
in IPC.
•	 Punishment of Fine has been enhanced in 83 offences. (Annexure-IV)
Fine of 10/-, 100/-, 200/-, 250/-500/- etc. have been enhanced to 1000,
2500/-, 5000,10,000/- etc.to make the fine meaningful.
•	 Mandatory minimum punishment has been introduced in 23 offences
(Annexure-V) viz. buying child for the purpose of prostitution, organised
crime, terrorist act, hurt to deter public servant from his duty, personating
a public servant, theft etc.
•	 For the 1st time “Community Service” has been introduced as one of the
punishments specifically provided for 6 petty offences mentioned below.
It introduces the reformative approach in the punishment scheme which is
aimed towards achieving ‘NYAYA’ in the society
(1) Public Servant unlawfully engaging in trade u/s 202 BNS.
(2) Non-appearance in response to a proclamation published under sub
section (i) of section 84 of BNSS is punishable u/s 209 BNS.
(3) Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restrain exercise of lawful
power of public servant u/s 226 BNS.
(4) Petty theft on return of theft money and a person is convicted for the
first time U/s 303(2) BNS.
(5) Misconduct in public by a drunken person u/s 355 BNS.
(6) Defamation u/s 356 BNS.
•	 Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe her u/s 76
of BNS and Voyeurism u/s 77 of BNS has been made Gender neutral. The
offence relating to importation of a person from foreign country has also
been made gender neutral to cover both boys and girls in Section 141 of
the BNS, 2023. It will protect the minor boys and girls from being used for
the purposes of forced or seduced illicit intercourse.
•	 Age based parameters for differential punishment (for gang rape of 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 11
a minor girl) has been removed and now Section 70(2) prescribes life
imprisonment (till remainder of that person’s natural life) or death for gang
rape of a woman below the age of 18 years.
•	 Definition of Child is added in Sec. 2 (3) and transgender has been
included in the definition of ‘Gender’ Sec. 2(10) as any person including
transgender with male and female. Uniformity has been introduced in the
use of expression ‘child’ throughout the BNS, 2023 which is achieved by
replacing the expression ‘minor’ and ‘child under the age of eighteen years’
with the word ‘child’.
•	 Replacing ‘Night’ with ‘after sunset and before sunrise’.
•	 Movable property includes tangible as well as intangible property. [Sec 2
(21)]
•	 Section 303 (2) of the BNS, 2023 presents a fine example of deterrence
and reformative approach of punishment. On the one hand, for a second
conviction of any person ‘for theft’, the section prescribes a higher
punishment up to 5 years with a mandatory minimum of 1 year, on the
other hand where the value of stolen property is less than 5,000 rupees
and the first-time offender restores the stolen property, the punishment of
community service has only been prescribed. 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
12 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Annexures I to V Showing
All Major and Important
Changes in BNS in
Comparison of IPC
→ List of new sections and partly added provisions in BNS is
Annexure-I
→ List of IPC sections, which have been deleted/repealed in
BNS is Annexure-II
→ List of sections, in which punishment of imprisonment
has been increased in BNS is Annexure-III
→ List of sections, where punishment of fine has been
enhanced in BNS is Annexure-IV
→ List of sections, in which Mandatory Minimum
Punishment Introduced in BNS is Annexure-V
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 13
Legal Provisions of BNS
Highlighting Changes,
New Addition, Punishment
and Nature of Offence
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Sec. 1
(1) to
(6)
Short title, commencement and application S. 1 - S. 5
Sec. 2
(1) to
(39)
Definitions, In this Sanhita, unless the context
otherwise requires,––
(3) “Child” means any person below the age of eighteen
years;
S. 6 to
52A
New
section
(10) “gender”.—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives
are used of any person, whether male, female or
transgender.
Explanation.— “transgender” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in Sec. (k) of section 2 of the Transgender
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019;
(21) “movable property” includes property of every
description, except land and things attached to the
earth or permanently fastened to anything which is
attached to the earth;
New
Addition
(39) words and expressions used but not defined in this
Sanhita but defined in the Information Technology
Act, 2000 and the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita
New
addition
Sec. 3
(1) to
(9)
General explanations S.6, S.7,
S.27,
S.32,
S.34,
S.35-S.38
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
14 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
CHAPTER-II
OF PUNISHMENTS
Sec. 4 Punishments
(f) Community Service as Punishment has been added
in BNS
S. 53
New
Provision
Sec. 5 Commutation of sentence S.54 -
S.55A
Sec. 6 Fractions of terms of punishment
In calculating fractions of terms of punishment,
imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent
to imprisonment for twenty years unless otherwise
provided.
S. 57
Sec. 7 Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment)
wholly or partly rigorous or simple
S. 60
Sec. 8
(1) to
(7)
Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of fine,
etc.
Note: Punishment and fine Increased
S.63 to
S.70
Sec. 9
(1) to
(2)
Limit of punishment of offence made up of several
offences
S.71
Sec. 10 Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences,
judgment stating that it is doubtful of which
S.72
Sec. 11 Solitary confinement S.73
Sec. 12 Limit of solitary confinement S.74
Sec. 13 Enhanced punishment for certain offences after
previous conviction
S.75
CHAPTER-III
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
Sec. 14 Act done by a person bound or by mistake of fact
believing himself bound, by law
S. 76
Sec. 15 Act of judge when acting judicially S. 77
Sec. 16 Act done pursuant to judgement or order of court S. 78
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 15
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 17 Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact
believing himself justified by law
S. 79
Sec. 18 Accident in doing a lawful act S. 80
Sec. 19 Act likely to cause harm but done without criminal
intent and to prevent other harm
S. 81
Sec. 20 Act of a child under seven years of age S. 82
Sec. 21 Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of
age of immature understanding
S. 83
Sec. 22 Act of a person of unsound mind S. 84
Sec. 23 Act of person incapable of judgment by reason of
intoxication caused against his will
S. 85
Sec. 24 Offence requiring intent or knowledge committed by
one who is intoxicated
S. 86
Sec. 25 Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause
death or grievous hurt, done by consent
S. 87
Sec. 26 Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in
good faith for person’s benefit
S. 88
Sec. 27 Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person of
unsound mind, by, or by consent of guardian
S. 89
Sec. 28 Consent known to be given under fear or
misconception
S. 90
Sec. 29 Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of
harm caused
S. 91
Sec. 30 Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without
consent
S. 92
Sec. 31 Communication made in good faith S. 93
Sec. 32 Act to which a person is compelled by threats S. 94
Sec. 33 Act causing slight harm S. 95
OF RIGHT OF PRIVATE DEFENCE
Sec. 34 Things done in private defence S. 96
Sec. 35 Right of private defence of body and of property S. 97
Sec. 36 Right of private defence against act of a person of
unsound mind, etc.
S. 98
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
16 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 37 Acts against which there is no right of private defence S. 99
Sec. 38 When right of private defence of the body extends to
causing death
S. 100
Sec. 39 When such right extends to causing any harm other
than death
S. 101
Sec. 40 Commencement and continuance of the right of
private defence of the body
S. 102
Sec. 41 When right of private defence of property extends to
Causing death
S. 103
Sec. 42 When such right extends to causing any harm other
than death
S. 104
Sec. 43 Commencement and continuance of the right of
private defence of property
S. 105
Sec. 44 Right of private defence against deadly assault when
there is risk of harm to innocent person
S. 106
CHAPTER-IV
OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
Sec. 45 Abetment of a thing S. 107
Sec. 46 Abettor S. 108
Sec. 47 Abetment in India of offences outside India S. 108A
Sec. 48 Abetment outside India for offence in India
A person abets an offence within the meaning of this
Sanhita who, without and beyond India, abets the
commission of any act in India which would constitute
an offence if committed in India.
(Illustration- A, in country X, instigates B, to commita
murder in India, A is guilty of abetting murder)
New
provision
Sec. 49 Punishment of abetment if act abetted is committed in
consequence and where no express provision is made
for its punishment
Cognizable and Non-Cognizable offence according to
offence and punishable with same as for offence abetted
S. 109
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 17
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 50 Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act
with different intention from that of abettor
Cognizable and Non-Cognizable offence according to
offence and punishable with same as for offence abetted
S. 110
Sec. 51 Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different
act done
Cognizable and Non-Cognizable offence according to
offence and punishable for the offence intended to be
abetted
S. 111
Sec. 52 Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act
abetted and for act done
Cognizable and Non-Cognizable offence according to
offence and punishable with same as for offence abetted
S. 112
Sec. 53 Liability of abettor for an effect caused by act abetted
different from that intended by abettor
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable according as offence
abetted and punishable with same as for offence
committed
S. 113
Sec. 54 Abettor present when offence is committed
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable according as offence
abetted and punishable with same as for offence
committed
S. 114
Sec. 55 Abetment of offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable according to
the offence abetted and punishable with (1)
imprisonment for 7 years and fine
(2) imprisonment for 14 years and fine , if act is done
S. 115
Sec. 56 Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence abetted.
Punishable with imprisonment extended to
S. 116
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
18 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(1) One fourth of the longest term provided for the
offence, or fine, or both.
(2) One half of the longest term provided for the
offence, or fine, or both, if the abettor or the person
abetted is a public servant.
Sec. 57 Abetting commission of offence by public or by more
than ten persons
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence abetted.
Punishable for imprisonment for 7 years and fine.
Note: Punishment increased
S. 117
Sec. 58 Concealing design to commit offence punishable with
death or imprisonment for life
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence abetted
(a) if that offence be committed, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years; or
(b) if the offence be not committed, with
imprisonment of either description, for a term
which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
S. 118
Sec. 59 Public servant concealing design to commit offence
which it is his duty to prevent
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence abetted is
Punishable with imprisonment extending to
(a) One half of the longest term provided for the
offence, or fine, or both, if offence be committed
(b) Imprisonment for 10 years, if offence is punishable
with death or life
(c) One fourth of the longest term provided for the
offence, or fine, or both, if offence is not committed
S. 119
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 19
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 60 Concealing design to commit offence punishable with
imprisonment
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence abetted is
Punishable with imprisonment extending to
(a) One fourth of the longest term provided for the
offence, or fine, or both, if offence be committed
(b) One eighth part of the longest term provided
for the offence, or fine, or both, if offence be not
committed
S. 120
OF CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY
Sec. 61 Criminal Conspiracy
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence which is the object of conspiracy is,
(2) (a) To commit an offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or RI for two years or above
or where no express provision is made in this
Sanhita for the conspiracy shall be punished in the
same manner as if he had abetted such offence.
(2) (b) In other cases, not mentioned in (a) above, shall
be punished with Imprisonment not exceeding 6
months, or with fine, or with both
S. 120A -
S. 120B
OF ATTEMPT
Sec. 62 Punishment for attempting to commit offences
punishable with imprisonment for life or other
imprisonment
Cognizable or Non-Cognizable, according to the
offence abetted is
Punishable with imprisonment extending to One half
of the imprisonment for life, or imprisonment not
exceeding one half of the longest term provided for the
offence, or with fine, or with both
S. 511
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
20 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
CHAPTER-V
OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILD
OF SEXUAL OFFENCES
Sec. 63 Rape S. 375
Sec. 64 Punishment for rape
Cognizable offence punishable with
(1) Rigorous imprisonment for not less than 10 years,
but may extend to imprisonment for life and fine
(2) Rigorous imprisonment for not less than 10 years
but may extend to imprisonment for life which
shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural
life and fine
S. 376
(1), (2)
Sec. 65 Punishment for rape in certain cases
(1) Rape on woman under 16 years of age
Cognizable offence
Punishable with rigorous imprisonment for not less
than 20 years but may extendto imprisonment for life
which shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural
life and also be liable to fine
S. 376 (3)
(2) Rape on woman under 12 years of age
Cognizable offence
Punishable with rigorous imprisonment for not less
than 20 years but may extend to imprisonment for life
which shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural
life and with fine or with death
S. 376 AB
Sec. 66 Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent
vegetative state of victim
Cognizable offence
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for not less
than 20 years but may extend to imprisonment for life
which shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural
life or with death
S. 376 A
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 21
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 67 Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during
separation
Cognizable offence (only on the complaint of the
Victim)
Punishable with imprisonment for not less than 2 years
which may extend to 7 years and fine
S. 376 B
Sec. 68 Sexual intercourse by a person in authority
Cognizable offence
Punishable with rigorous imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than 5
years but which may extend to 10 years and shall also
be liable to fine
S. 376 C
Sec. 69 Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means,
etc. Whoever, by deceitful means or by making
promise to marry to a woman without any intention
of fulfilling the same, has sexual intercourse with her,
such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence
of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term, which may extend to ten years
and shall also be liable to fine
Cognizable offence
New
Provision
Sec. 70
(1)
(2)
(1) Gang Rape
Cognizable offence
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for not less
than 20 years but may extend to imprisonment for life
which shall mean the remainder of that person’s natural
life and fine
(2) Gang rape on women under the age of 18
(Age increased from 16 years to 18 years in this offence)
Cognizable offence
Where a woman under 18 years of age is raped by
one or more persons constituting a group or acting in
furtherance of a common intention, each of those
S. 376 D
New
Provision
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
22 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence
of rape and shall be punished with imprisonment for
life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder
of that person’s natural life, and with fine, or with death
Note: To remove age based parameters
Sec. 71 Punishment for Repeat offenders (Sec. 64, 65, 66, 70)
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life which shall
mean the remainder of that person’s natural life or with
death
376-E
Sec. 72 Disclosure of identity of victim of certain offences etc.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for 2 Years and fine.
Note- Earlier Sec. 228A of IPC covers both. Now two
separate offences have been made in Sec. 72 &
Sec. 73 of BNS
S.228A
Sec. 73 Printingof publishing any matter relating to court
proceedings without permission
Cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment for
2 years and fine.
S.228A
OF CRIMINAL FORCE AND ASSAULT AGAINST WOMEN
Sec. 74 Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent
to outrage her modesty
Cognizable offence. Whoever assaults or uses criminal
force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing
it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than one
year but which may extend to five years, and shall also
be liable to fine
S.354
Sec. 75 Sexual harassment
Cognizable offence punishable with
S.354A
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 23
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(2) Rigorous imprisonment with 3 years, or with fine,
or with both for offence specified in section 75 (1)
(i) (ii) (iii)
(3) imprisonment with 1 year, or with fine, or with
both for offence specified in section 75 (1)(iv)
Sec. 76 Assault or use of criminal force to women with intent
to disrobe.
Whoever (Any Man who) assaults or uses criminal
force to any woman or abets such act with the intention
of disrobing or compelling her to be naked, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Cognizable offence
Note: This offence has been made gender neutral.
S.354B
Sec. 77 Voyeurism
Whoever (Any Man who) watches, or captures
the image of a woman engaging in a private act in
circumstances where she would usually have the
expectation of not being observed either by the
perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of
the perpetrator or disseminates such image shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less
than one year, but which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less
than three years, but which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Cognizable offence
Note: Now a woman can also be punished. (Gender
Neutral)
S.354C
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
24 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 78 Stalking
Cognizable offence
Imprisonment up to 3 years and fine
In case of second or subsequent conviction,
imprisonment up to 5 years and fine
S.354 D
Sec. 79 Word gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a
woman
Cognizable offence
Imprisonment up to 3 years and fine
S.509
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE
Sec. 80 Dowry Death
Cognizable offence
Imprisonment for not less than 7 years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life
S.304-B
Sec. 81 Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing
belief of lawful marriage
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.493
Sec. 82 Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife
(1) Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
(2) Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine,
if concealed with whom the subsequent marriage is
contracted.
S.494
S.495
Sec. 83 Marriage ceremony, fraudulently gone through without
lawful marriage
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment upto seven years and
fine.
S.496
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 25
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 84 Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal
intent a married woman
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or with
fine or with both.
S.498
Sec. 85 Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting
her to cruelty
Cognizable (only on the complaint of the victim or her
blood relative or notified public servant)
Punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
three years and with fine.
S.498A
Sec. 86 Cruelty (Defined) S.498A
Sec. 87 Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel
her marriage, etc.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.366
Sec. 88 Causing miscarriage
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine
or both. If the woman be quick with child, shall be
punished with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years and with fine.
S.312
OF CAUSING MISCARRIAGE ETC
Sec. 89 Causing miscarriage without woman’s consent
Cognizable
punishable imprisonment for life or imprisonment for
ten years and fine.
S.313
Sec. 90
(1)
Death caused by act done with intent to cause
miscarriage
Cognizable
(1) punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine
(2) if without consent, punishable imprisonment for
life or as above.
S.314
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
26 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 91 Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive
or to cause to die after birth
Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for ten years or with
fine or with both.
S. 315
Sec. 92 Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting
to culpable homicide
Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S. 316
OF OFFENCES AGAINST CHILD
Sec. 94 Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body
Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or with
fine, or with both
S. 318
Sec. 95 Hiring, employing or engaging a child to commit an
offence
Whoever hires, employs or engages any child
to commit an offence shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description which shall not
be less than three years but which may extend to ten
years, and with fine; and if the offence be committed
shall also be punished with the punishment provided
for that offence as if the offence has been committed by
such person himself.
Explanation. —Hiring, employing, engaging or using a
child forsexual exploitation or pornography is covered
within the meaning of this section.
Cognizable offence
New
offence
Sec. 96 Procuration of child
Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any child
(earlier any minor girl under the age of 18 years) to go
from any place or to do any act with intent that such
child may be, or knowing that it is likely that such child
S. 366A
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 27
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with
another person shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.\
Note: Minor girl has been replaced with Child to made
the offence gender neutral
Sec. 97 Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years of age
with intent to steal from its person
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and
with fine.
S. 369
Sec. 98 Selling child for purposes of prostitution, etc
Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of
any child with intent that such child shall at any age
be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or
illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful
and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that
such child will at any age be employed or used for any
such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be
liable to fine
Note: Any person under the age of eighteen years has
been replaced with Child
S. 372
Sec. 99 Buying child for purpose of prostitution, etc
Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of
any child with intent that such child shall at any age be
employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or
S. 373
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
28 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful
and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that
such child will at any age be employed or used for any
such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less
than seven years but which may extend to fourteen
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment of either description for
a term which shall not be less than seven years but may
extend to fourteen years and shall also be liable to fine
Note: Minor has been replaced with Child
CHAPTER-VI
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING LIFE
Sec.100 Culpable homicide S.299
Sec.101 Murder (Definition)
Except in the cases here in after excepted, culpable
homicide is murder, ––
(a) If the act by which the death is caused is done with
the intention of causing death; or
(b) If the act by which the death is caused is done with
the intention of causing such bodily injury as the
offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the
person to whom the harm is caused; or
(c) If the act by which the death is caused is done with
the intention of causing bodily injury to any person
and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
death; or
(d) If the person committing the act by which the death
is caused, knows that it is so imminently dangerous
that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and
S.300
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 29
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
commits such act without any excuse for incurring the
risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
Note: (May read illustrations and exceptions
thoroughly given in the Sanhita)
Sec.102 Culpable homicide by causing death of person other
than person whose death was intended
S.301
Sec.103
(1)
Punishment for murder
Cognizable punishable with death or imprisonment for
life and fine.
S.302
Sec.103
(2)
Punishment for murder, when a group of five or more
persons acting in concert commits murder on the
ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth,
language, personal belief or any other similar ground
each member of such group shall be punished with death
or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Cognizable offence
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life
and fine.
Comment :- Special categories have been created within
the offence for murder and grievous hurt by group of five
or more persons’ on the grounds of the victim’s social
profile, particularly his ‘race’, caste or community, sex,
place of birth, language, personal belief and any other
grounds without specifically using the belief and any
other grounds without specifically using the term ‘mob
lynching’ for which a punishment of a minimum seven
years of mandatory imprisonment has been provided. In
case of causing ‘grievous hurt’ by group of five or more
persons on the ground race, caste or community etc. the
punishment is 7 years and fine.
New
Provision
Sec.104 Punishment for murder by life convict
Whoever, being under sentence of imprisonment for
life, commits murder, shall be punished with death
or with imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life.
S.303
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
30 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Cognizable offence
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life,
which shall mean that the remainder of that person’s
natural life.
Note: Provision of life imprisonment also included
Sec.105 Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to
murder
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to
murder, shall be punished with imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment of either description for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by
which the death is caused is done with the intention
of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death; or with Imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years
and with fine, if the act is done with the knowledge that
it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to
cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to
cause death.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for not less than five years but which
may extend to ten years and fine. If act be done with
knowledge, than imprisonment for ten years and fine.
Note: Minimum Punishment of 5 years provided
S.304
Sec.106
(1)
Causing death by negligence
Whoever causes death of any person by doing any
rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable
homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if such
act is done by a registered medical practitioner while
performing medical procedure, he shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable
to fine. (Note- No Change for medical negligence)
S.304 A
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 31
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for five years and fine
Note: Punishment of imprisonment enhanced from 2
years to 5 years
Sec.106
(2)
Punishment for not reporting of death caused by rash
or negligent driving of vehicle and escapes from the
spot.
Whoever causes death of any person by rash and
negligent driving of vehicle not amounting to culpable
homicide, and escapes without reporting it to a police
officer or a Magistrate soon after the incident, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description of a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
New
Provision
Sec.107 Abetment of suicide of child or person of unsound
mind
Cognizable offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.305
Sec.108 Abetment of suicide
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.306
Sec.109 Attempt to murder
(1) punishable with Imprisonment for ten years and
fine. If such act causes hurt to any person than with
imprisonment for life, or as above.
(2) In case of life convict, he may, if hurt is cause, be
punished with death or with imprisonment for life,
which shall mean the remainder of that person’s
natural life.
Cognizable offence
punishable with Imprisonment for death or
imprisonment for life which shall mean the remainder
of that person’s natural life.
Note: Punishment Increased
S.307
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
32 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.110 Attempt to commit culpable homicide
Cognizable offence
punishable with Imprisonment of either description
which may extend to three years, or with fine or with
both if hurt is caused, than imprisonment which may
extend to seven years or with fine or with both.
S.308
Sec.111 Organized crime
(1) Any continuing unlawful activity including
kidnapping, robbery, vehicle theft, extortion, land
grabbing, contract killing, economic offence, cybercrimes, trafficking of persons, drugs, weapons
or illicit goods or services, human trafficking for
prostitution or ransom, by any person or a group
of persons acting in concert, singly or jointly, either
as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on
behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat
of violence, intimidation, coercion, or by any other
unlawful means to obtain direct or indirect material
benefit including a financial benefit, shall constitute
organised crime.
The meaning of “organised crime syndicate”
“continuing unlawful activity” and "Economic
offence" has been given in the Explanation. Also the
punishment is given in sub-section (2) to sub- section
(7) of this section.
Cognizable and punishable with
(2)(a) Death or imprisonment for life and fine not less
than ten lakh rupees.
(2)(b) For not less than five years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine of not less than
five lakh rupees.
(3) For not less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and fine of not less than five
lakh rupees.
(4) For not less than five years but which may extend to
New
Provision
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 33
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
 imprisonment for life and fine of not less than five
lakh rupees.
(5) For notless than three years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine of not less than
five lakh rupees.
(6) For not less than three years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine of not less than
two lakh rupees
(7) For not less than three years but which may extend
to imprisonment for ten years and fine of rupees not
less than one lakh rupees.
Sec.112 Petty organised crime
(1) Whoever, being a member of a group or gang,
either singly or jointly, commits any act of theft,
snatching, cheating, unauthorised selling of tickets,
unauthorised betting or gambling, selling of public
examination question papers or any other similar
criminal act, is said to commit petty organised
crime.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section
“theft” includes trick theft, theft from vehicle, dwelling
house or business premises, cargo theft, pick
pocketing, theft through card skimming, shoplifting
and theft of Automated Teller Machine.
(2) Whoever commits any petty organised crime shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than one year but which may
extend to seven years,and shall also be liable to fine.
Cognizable offence
New
Provision
Sec.113 Terrorist act
(1) Whoever does any act with the intent to threaten
or likely to threaten the unity, integrity, sovereignty,
security, or economic security of India or with the
intent to strike terror or likely to strike terror in the
people or any section of the people in India or in
any foreign country,
New
Provision
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
34 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive
substance or inflammable substance or fire arms
or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious
gases or other chemicals or by any other substance
(whether biological, radioactive, nuclear or
otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other
means of whatever nature to cause or likely to
cause,—
 i) death of, or injury to, any person or persons; or
 ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property;
or
 iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential
to the life of the community in India or in any
foreign country; or
 iv) damage to, the monetary stability of India by
way of production or smuggling or circulation of
counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any
other material; or
 v) damage or destruction of any property in India or
in a foreign country used or intended to be used
for the defence of India or in connection with any
other purposes of the Government of India, any
State Government or any of their agencies; or
b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of
criminal force or attempts to do so or causes death of
any public functionary or attempts to cause death of
any public functionary; or
c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and
threatening to kill or injure such person or does
any other act in order to compel the Government
of India, any State Government or the Government
of a foreign country or an international or intergovernmental organisation or any other person to do
 or abstain from doing any act, commit a terrorist act.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub- section, 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 35
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
i) “public functionary” means the constitutional
authorities or any other functionary notified in
the Official Gazette by the Central Government as
public functionary;
ii) “counterfeit Indian currency” means the counterfeit
currency as may be declared after examination by
an authorised or notified forensic authority that
such currency imitates or compromises with the key
security features of Indian currency.
(2) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall, —
 i) if such offence has resulted in the death of any
person, be punished with death or imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
 ii) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or
advocates, abets, advises or incites, directly or
knowingly facilitates the commission of a terrorist
act or any act preparatory to the commission of a
terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine. Terrorist act.
(4) Whoever organises or causes to be organised any
camp or camps for imparting training in terrorist
act, or recruits or causes to be recruited any person
or persons for commission of a terrorist act, shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(5) Any person who is a member of an organisation
which is involved in terrorist act, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
36 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(6) Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals,
or attempts to harbour or conceal any person
knowing that such person has committed a
terrorist act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine: Provided that this
sub-section shall not apply to any case in which
the harbour or concealment is by the spouse of the
offender.
(7) Whoever knowingly possesses any property
derived or obtained from commission of any
terrorist act or acquired through the commission
of any terrorist act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that the officer not below the rank
of Superintendent of Police shall decide whether
to register the case under this section or under the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
Cognizable and punishable with
(2)(a) For death or imprisonment for life and fine.
(2)(b) For not less than five years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine.
(3) For not less than five years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine.
(4) For not less than five years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine.
(5) For life and fine.
(6) For not less than three years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life and fine.
(7) For life and fine.
OF HURT
Sec.114 Hurt S.319
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 37
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.115 Voluntarily causing hurt
Non-Cognizable
Punishable with Imprisonment for one year or with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
both.
Note: Fine increased
S.321,
S.323
Sec.116 Grievous hurt
(h) Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the
sufferer to be during the space of fifteen days in
severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary
pursuits.
Note: In section 116 of the BNS, 2023 the number of
days provided for the sufferer in severe bodily pain for
the purpose of ‘grievous hurt’ has been reduced from
'20 days' to '15 days'. It is done keeping in view the
advancement in the medical treatment which provides
quicker recovery.
S.320
Sec.117 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt
Cognizable offence
(2) punishable with Imprisonment for seven years and
with fine.
(3) Grievous hurt causing permanent disability or
persistent vegetative state
Punishment enhanced from 07 years to rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not less than ten
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of
that person’s natural life.
(4) Hurt caused by a mob
When a group of five or more persons acting in
concert, causes grievous hurt to a person on the ground
of his race, caste or community, sex, place of birth,
language, personal belief or any other similar ground,
each member of such group shall be guilty of the
S.322,
S.325
New
Provision
New
Provision
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
38 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
 offence of causing grievous hurt, and shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be
liable to fine.
Sec.118 Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt by dangerous
weapons or means
(1) Cognizable punishable with Imprisonment for
three years, or fine of twenty thousand rupees, or
both.
(2) Cognizable punishable with Imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment for not less than one year but
which may extend to ten years and with fine.
Note: Fine increased
S.324
S.326
Sec.119 Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort
property or to constrain to an illegal act.
(1) Causing hurt for the purpose of extorting from
the sufferer, or from any person interested in the
sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of
constraining the sufferer or any person interested
in such sufferer to do anything which is illegal or
which may facilitate the commission of an offence
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten
years and fine.
(2) Punishable with Imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for ten years and fine in cases other
than in (1) above.
Cognizable offence
S.327
S. 329
Sec.120 Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to extort
confession, or to compel restoration of property
Cognizable offence
(1) punishable with imprisonment for seven years and
fine for voluntarily causing hurt.
(2) punishable with imprisonment for ten years and
fine for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
S.330
S.331
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 39
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.121 Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt to deter
public servant from his duty
(1) punishable with imprisonment for five years, or
fine or both for voluntarily causing hurt.
(2) punishable with imprisonment for not less than
one year, or imprisonment for ten years and fine
for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
Cognizable offence
Note: Punishment Increased
S.332–
333
Sec.122 Voluntarily causing hurt or grievous hurt on
provocation.
(1) Non-Cognizable punishable with imprisonment for
one month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both
for voluntarily causing hurt.
(2) Cognizable punishable with imprisonment for five
years, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both for
voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.334 -
S.335
Sec.123 Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to
commit an offence
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and with
fine.
S.328
Sec.124 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.
Cognizable offence
(1) punishable with imprisonment for not less than ten
years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life and fine for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
(2) punishable with imprisonment for five years, but
which may extend to seven years and fine for
voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid.
S.326 A
S.326 B
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
40 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.125 Act endangering life or personal safety of others
Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for three months, or
fine of two thousand rupees, or both but
(a) if hurt is caused, imprisonment for six months, or
fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) if grievous hurt is caused, imprisonment for three
years, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both
Note: Punishment & fine increased
S.336-
S.338
Sec.126 Wrongful restraint
Cognizable offence
punishable with simple imprisonment for one month,
or fine of five thousand rupees, or with both.
Note: Fine increased
S.339,
S.341
Sec.127 Wrongful confinement
Cognizable offence
(2) Punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine
of five thousand rupees, or both.
(3) If confined for three or more days, punishable
with imprisonment for three years, or fine of ten
thousand rupees, or both.
(4) If confined for ten or more days, punishable with
imprisonment for five years, or fine of ten thousand
rupees.
(5) If a writ has been issued for his liberation than with
imprisonment for two years, in addition to any
term of imprisonment under any other section and
fine.
(6) If confined in secrete, with imprisonment for three
years, in addition to other punishment for which
he is liable to and fine.
(7) If confined for extorting property etc, punishable
with imprisonment for three years and fine.
S.340,
S.342
to S.348
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 41
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(8) If confined for extorting confession etc, punishable
with imprisonment for three years and fine.
Note: Punishment & fine increased
OF CRIMINAL FORCE AND ASSAULT
Sec.128 Force S.349
Sec.129 Criminal force S.350
Sec.130 Assault S.351
Sec.131 Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise
than on grave provocation
Non-cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three months, or
fine of one thousand rupees, or both
Note: Fine increased
S.352
Sec.132 Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from
discharge of his duty
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both
S.353
Sec.133 Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonor
person, otherwise than on grave provocation
Non-cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both
S.355
Sec.134 Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of
property carried by a person
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both
S.356
Sec.135 Assault or criminal force in attempt to wrongfully to
confine a person
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine of
S.357
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
42 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
Sec.136 Assault or criminal force on grave and sudden
provocation
Non-Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for one month,
or fine of one thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.358
OF KIDNAPPING, ABDUCTION, SLAVERY AND FORCED LABOUR
Sec.137 Kidnapping
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S.359 -
S.361,
S.363
Sec.138 Abduction S.362
Sec.139 Kidnapping or maiming a child for purposes of begging
Cognizable offence
(1) If kidnapping is for begging, punishable with
rigorous imprisonment not less than ten years but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and
fine.
(2) If kidnapping for maiming and begging, punishable
with imprisonment not be less than 20 years which
may extend to remainder of that person’s natural
life, and fine.
S.363A
Sec.140 Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder or for
ransom etc.
Cognizable offence
(1) If for murder, punishable with imprisonment life,
or rigorous imprisonment for ten years, and fine.
(2) If for ransom etc. punishable with death, or
imprisonment for life and fine.
(3) If for secretly or wrongfully confining, punishable
with seven years and fine.
S.364-
S.365,
S.367
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 43
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(4) If for grievous hurt, slavery etc. punishable with
imprisonment for ten years and fine.
Sec.141 Importation of girl or boy from foreign country
The offence relating to importation of a person from
foreign country has been made gender neutral to cover
both boys and girls. It will protect the minor boys and
girls from being used for the purposes of forced or
seduced illicit intercourse.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.366 B
Sec.142 Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement,
kidnapped or abducted person
Cognizable offence
punishable with same as punishment for kidnapping or
abduction.
S.368
Sec.143 Trafficking of person
‘Beggary’ has been introduced as a form of exploitation
for trafficking and has been made punishable in this
section
Cognizable offence
(2) punishable with rigorous imprisonment not less
than seven years but which may extend to ten years
and fine.
(3) Trafficking of more than one person. punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for not less than ten
years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life and fine.
(4) Trafficking of a child. punishable with rigorous
imprisonment not less than ten years but which
may extend to imprisonment for life and fine.
(5) Trafficking of more than one child. punishable with
rigorous imprisonment not less than fourteen years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life and
fine.
S.370
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
44 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(6) If convicted for trafficking of child on more than
one occasion. punishable with imprisonment
for life which shall mean the remainder of that
person’s natural life and fine.
(7) If public servant or police officer is involved in
trafficking of child. punishable with imprisonment
for life which shall mean the remainder of that
person’s natural life and fine.
Sec. 144 Exploitation of a trafficked person
Cognizable offence
(1) If child has been trafficked, punishable with
rigorous imprisonment not less than five years but
which may extend to ten years and fine.
(2) If any person has been trafficked, punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for not less than three years
but which may extend to seven years and fine.
Note: Punishment increased
S.370A
Sec. 145 Habitual dealing in slaves
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life or either term
not exceeding ten years and with fine.
S.371
Sec. 146 Unlawful compulsory labour
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine or
with both.
S.374
CHAPTER VII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST STATE
Sec. 147 Waging or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging
of war against Government of India
Cognizable offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life and fine.
S.121
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 45
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 148 Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by u/s 147
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for ten years and with fine.
S.121A
Sec. 149 Collecting arms, etc. , with intention of waging war
against government of India
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or either
description for a term not exceeding ten years and with
fine.
S.122
Sec. 150 Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment of either description for
a term not exceeding ten years and with fine.
S.123
Sec. 151 Assaulting President, Governor, etc, with intent to
compel or restrain exercise of any lawful power
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment of either description for
a term not exceeding seven years and with fine.
S.124
Sec. 152 Acts endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of
India
Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words,
either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible
representation, or by electronic communications or
by use of financials mean, or otherwise, or excites or
attempt to excite, secessions or armed rebellion or
subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist
activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and
integrity of India , or indulge in or commits any such
act shall be punished.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment which may extend to seven years and
with fine.
New
Provision
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
46 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 153 Waging war against foreign state at peace with
Government of India
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life to which
fine may be added or with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years
to which fine may be added or with fine.
S.125
Sec. 154 Depredation on territories of foreign state at peace with
Government of India
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and
fine and forfeiture of certain property acquired by such
depredation.
S.126
Sec. 155 Receiving property taken by war or depredation
mentioned in sections 153 and 154
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years and with fine and forfeiture of property so
received.
S.127
Sec. 156 Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or
war to escape
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and with
fine.
S.128
Sec. 157 Public servant negligently suffering prisoner to escape
Cognizable offence
punishable with simple imprisonment which may
extend to three years and fine.
S.129
Sec. 158 Aiding escape of, rescuing or harboring such prisoner.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and fine.
S.130
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 47
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
CHAPTER VIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE
Sec. 159 Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier,
sailor or airman from his duty.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.131
Sec. 160 Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in
consequence thereof
Cognizable offence
punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and fine.
S.132
Sec. 161 Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his
superior officer, when in execution of his office.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
three years and fine.
S.133
Sec. 162 Abetment of such assault, if the assault committed.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years and fine.
S.134
Sec. 163 Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
two years, or fine or both.
S.135
Sec. 164 Harboring deserter.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
two years ,or fine or both.
S.136
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
48 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 165 Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through
negligence of master.
Non Cognizable
punishable with fine of three thousand rupees.
S.137
Sec. 166 Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or
airman.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine or
both.
S.138
Sec.167 Persons subject to certain Acts.
No person subject to the Airforce Act, Army Act and
Navy Act or shall be subject to punishment under this
Sanhita for the offences defined in this chapter.
S.139
Sec.168 Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor
or airman.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for three months, or
fine of two thousand rupees or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.140
CHAPTER IX
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS
Sec.169 Candidate, electoral right defined S.171 A
Sec.170 Bribery S.171 B
Sec.171 Undue influence at elections S.171 C
Sec.172 Personation at elections S.171 D
Sec.173 Punishment for bribery
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one year or fine or
both or if treating only, fine only.
S.171 E
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 49
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.174 Punishment for undue influence or personation at an
election.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one year or fine or
both.
S.171F
Sec.175 False statement in connection with an election.
Non Cognizable
punishable with fine.
S.171 G
Sec.176 Illegal payments in connection with an election.
Non Cognizable
punishable with fine of ten thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.171 H
Sec.177 Failure to keep election accounts.
Non Cognizable
punishable with fine of five thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.171I
CHAPTER X
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY NOTES,
BANKNOTES, AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS
Sec.178 Counterfeiting coin, government stamps, currencynotes or bank-notes
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description, which may extend
to ten years and fine.
S.230,
S.232
S.246,
S.249
S.255,
S.489 A
Sec.179 Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit coin,
Government stamp, currency-notes or banknotes.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, imprisonment
which may extend to ten years and fine.
S.250,
S.251
S.258,
S.260
S.489B
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
50 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.180 Possession of forged or counterfeit coin, Government
stamp, currency-notes or bank-notes.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
S.242,
 S.252,
S.253,
S.259,
 S.489C
Sec.181 Making or possessing instruments or materials for
forging or counterfeiting coin, Government stamp,
currency notes or bank-notes.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for life, imprisonment
which may extend to ten years and with fine.
S.233,
S.235,
S.256,
S.257,
S.489D
Sec.182 Making or using documents resembling currency-notes
or bank-notes
Non Cognizable
(1) punishable with fine of 300 rupees.
(2) punishable with fine of 600 rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.489 E
Sec.183 Effacing writing from substance bearing Government
stamp, or removing from document a stamp used for it,
with intent to cause loss to Government
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
three years,or with fine, or with both.
S.261
Sec.184 Using Government stamp known to have been before used
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both.
S.262
Sec.185 Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
three years,or with fine, or with both.
S.263
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 51
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.186 Prohibition of fictitious stamps
Cognizable offence
punishable with fine of two hundred rupees.
Such stamp die plate etc may be seized and if seized be
forfeited.
S.263 A
Sec.187 Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different
weight or composition from that fixed by law
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S.244
Sec.188 Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S.245
CHAPTER XI
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY
Sec.189 Unlawful assembly
Cognizable offence
(2) Punishable with imprisonment for six months, or
with fine or with both.
(3) If joining or continuing in an Unlawful assembly.
Punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to two years, or with fine or with both.
(4) If joining an Unlawful assembly with deadly
weapons. Cognizable punishable with
imprisonment for two years, with fine or with both.
(5) If knowingly joining or continuing, when
commanded to disperse. Imprisonment for 6
months, with fine or with both.
(6) When hiring, engaging etc to take part. Punishable
with the same for as far a member of such
assembly, and for any offence committed by any
member ofsuch assembly.
S.141
S.145,
S.150
S.151,
S.157
S.158
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
52 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(7) Harboring. punishable with imprisonment for six
months, with fine or with both.
(8) Being hired to take part. punishable with
imprisonment for six months, with fine or with
both.
(9) To go armed. with imprisonment for two years,
with fine or with both
Sec.190 Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence
committed in prosecution of common object.
According as offence is cognizable or non-cognizable
S.149
Sec.191 Rioting
Cognizable offence
(2) punishable with imprisonment for two years, or
with fine, or with both.
(3) If armed with deadly weapon, punishable with
imprisonment for five years, with fine or with both.
Note: Punishment increased
S.146-148
Sec.192 Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot if
rioting be committed, if not committed
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for one years, if not
committed then imprisonment for six months, or fine,
or both.
S.153
Sec.193 Liability of owner, occupier, etc of land on which an
unlawful assembly or riot takes place
Non Cognizable
(1) If information is not given punishable with fine one
thousand rupees.
(2) If for some person benefit, punishablewith fine.
(3) If for agent of owner or occupier benefit,
punishable with fine.
S.154
S.156
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 53
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.194 Affray
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for one month, or fine
of one thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.159
S.160
Sec.195 Assaulting or obstructing public servant when
suppressing riot etc.
(1) Cognizable, punishable with imprisonment
for three years, or fine not less than twenty-five
thousand, or both.
Note: Fine increased
(2) Non-Cognizable, Whoever threatens to assault or
attempts to obstruct any public servant or threatens
or attempts to use criminal force to any public
servant in the discharge of his duty as such public
servant is endeavoring to disperse an unlawful
assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to one years, or with
fine, or with both
S.152
New
Provision
Sec.196 Promoting enmity between different groups on ground
of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language etc.
and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony
(1) Cognizable punishable with imprisonment for
three years or fine, or both
(2) If promoting enemity between classes, place of
worship, religious assembly or ceremonies etc.
Cognizable, punishable with imprisonment for five
years and fine.
S.153 A
Sec.197 Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national
integration
In Section 197(1)(d) of BNS, the act of making or
publishing false or misleading information which
has tendency to jeopardize the sovereignty, unity and
integrity or security of India has been made an offence
S.153B
New
Provision
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
54 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Cognizable offence
(1) punishable with imprisonment for three years, or
fine, or both
(2) If committed in place of worship etc. punishable
with imprisonment for five years and fine.
CHAPTER XII
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS
Sec.198 Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause
injury to any person
Non Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for one year, or
fine, or both
S.166
Sec.199 Public servant disobeying direction under law.
Cognizable offence
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for not less
than 6 months which may extend to 2 years and fine.
S.166 A
Sec.200 Punishment for non-treatment of victim.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for oneyear, or fine, or
both
S.166 B
Sec.201 Public servant framing incorrect document with intent
to cause injury.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine,
or both
S.167
Sec.202 Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.
Non Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for one year, or
fine, or both or community service.
S.168
Sec.203 Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for
property.
S.169
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 55
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Non Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for two years, or
fine, or both and confiscation of property, if purchased.
Sec.204 Personating public servant.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for not less than six
months but which may extend to three years and fine.
S.170
Sec.205 Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant
with fraudulent intent.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for three months or fine
of five thousand rupees or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.171
CHAPTER XIII
OF CONTEMPT OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC
SERVANTS
Sec.206 Absconding to avoid service of summons or other
proceeding.
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for one
month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.172
Sec. 207 Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or
preventing publication thereof.
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for one
month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.173
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
56 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 208 Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public
servant.
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for one
month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.174
Sec.209 Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under
section 84 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
Cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for three years, or
fine, or both or community service. If declaration, has
been made under sub section (IV) of Section 84 BNS
punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S.174A
Sec.210 Omission to produce document or electronic record to
public servant by person legally bound to produce it.
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for one
month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.175
Sec.211 Omission to give notice or information to public
servant by person legally bound to give it.
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for one
month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months, or fine of ten thousand rupees, or both.
(c) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months, or fine of one thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.176
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 57
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.212 Furnishing false information.
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
month, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
(b) punishable with imprisonment for two years, or
fine, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.177
Sec.213 Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by
public servant to make it.
Non Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for six months,
or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.178
Sec.214 Refusing to answer public servant authorised to
question.
Non Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for six months,
or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.179
Sec.215 Refusing to sign statement.
Non Cognizable
punishable with simple imprisonment for three
months, or fine of three thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.180
Sec.216 False statement on oath or affirmation to public
servant or person authorized to administer an oath or
affirmation.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for three years and fine.
S.181
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
58 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.217 False information, with intent to cause public servant to
use his lawful power to injury of another person.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one year or fine of
ten thousand rupees or both.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.182
Sec.218 Resistance to taking of property by lawful authority of a
public servant.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for six months or fine of
ten thousand rupees or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.183
Sec.219 Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by
authority of public servant.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one month or fine of
five thousand rupees or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.184
Sec.220 Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by
authority of public servant.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one month, or fine
of two hundred rupees or both.
S.185
Sec.221 Obstructing public servant in discharge of public
functions.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for three months or fine
of two thousand five hundred rupees or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.186
Sec.222 Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to
give assistance.
S.187
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 59
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Non Cognizable
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for one
month or fine of two thousand five hundred rupees
or both.
(b) punishable with imprisonment for six months or
fine of five thousand rupees or both.
Note: Fine increased
Sec.223 Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public
servant.
Cognizable offence
(a) punishable with simple imprisonment for six
months or fine of two thousand five hundred
rupees or both.
(b) Cognizable punishable with imprisonment for one
year or fine of five thousand rupees or both.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.188
Sec.224 Threat of injury to public servant.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine or
both.
S.189
Sec.225 Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from
applying for protection to public servant.
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine or
both.
S.190
Sec.226 Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restraint
exercise of lawful power
A new Section 226 has been added in the BNS, 2023 to
punish those who attempt to commit suicide with the
intent to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful
power by a public servant.
New
Section
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
60 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Non Cognizable
punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine or
both, or community service.
CHAPTER XIV
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE
Sec.227 Giving false evidence (Definition) S.191
Sec.228 Fabricating false evidence (Definition) S.192
Sec.229
(1) &
(2)
Punishment for false evidence
Non Cognizable
(1) punishable with imprisonment for seven years and
ten thousand rupees.
(2) punishable with imprisonment for three years and
five thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.193
Sec.230
(1) &
(2)
Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to
procure conviction of capital offence.
Non Cognizable
(1) punishable with imprisonment for life, or rigorous
imprisonment for ten years and fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) If innocent is convicted and executed. punishable
with death, or as above.
Note: Fine increased
S.194
Sec.231 Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent
to procure conviction of offence punishable with
imprisonment of life or imprisonment.
Non Cognizable
punishable with the same as for the offence.
S.195
Sec.232
(1) &
(2)
Threatening any person to give false evidence.
Cognizable offence
S.195 A
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 61
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(1) punishable with imprisonment for seven years, or
fine or both.
(2) punishable with the same as for the offence
Sec.233 Using evidence known to be false.
Non Cognizable
punishable with the same as for giving or fabricating
false evidence.
S.196
Sec.234 Issuing or signing false certificate.
Non Cognizable
punishable with the same as for giving or fabricating
false evidence.
S.197
Sec.235 Using as true a certificate known to be false.
Non Cognizable
punishable with the same as for giving or fabricating
false evidence.
S.198
Sec.236 False statement made in declaration which is by law
receivable as evidence.
Non Cognizable
punishable with the same as for giving or fabricating
false evidence.
S.199
Sec.237 Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.
Non Cognizable
punishable with the same as for giving or fabricating
false evidence.
S.200
Sec.238 Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving
false information to screen offender.
(a) If the offence punishable with death, shall be
punished with imprisonment for seven years and
fine. According to the offence Cognizable/ Non
cognizable
S.201
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
62 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(b) If the offence is punishable with imprisonment
of life or imprisonment, which may extend to ten
years shall be punished with imprisonment which
may extend to three years and fine. Non cognizable.
(c) If the offence is punishable with imprisonment of
any term not exceeding ten years, shall be punished
with imprisonment for 1/4th of the longest term
provided for the offence, or fine, or both. Non
cognizable.
Sec.239 Intentional omission to give information of offence by
person bound to inform.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for six months, or fine
of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.202
Sec.240 Giving false information respecting an offence
committed.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.203
Sec.241 Destruction of document or electronic record to
preventits production as evidence.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine
of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.204
Sec.242 False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in
suit or prosecution.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine,
or both.
S.205
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 63
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.243 Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to
prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine
of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.206
Sec.244 Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as
forfeited or in execution.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.207
Sec.245 Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.208
Sec.246 Dishonestly making false claim in Court.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years and fine.
S.209
Sec.247 Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.210
Sec.248 False charge of offence made with intent to injure.
Non Cognizable
(a) Punishable with imprisonment for five years, or
fine of two lakh rupees, or both.
(b) Punishable with imprisonment for ten years and
fine.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.211
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
64 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.249 Harboring offender
Cognizable offence
(a) Punishable with imprisonment for five years and
fine.
(b) If punishable imprisonment with life or
imprisonment for ten years. Punishable with
imprisonment for three years and fine.
(c) Punishable with imprisonment for one year and not
for ten years. Punishable with imprisonment for
1/4th of the longest term, and of the description,
provided for the offence, or fine or both.
S.212
Sec.250 Taking gift, etc. to screen an offender from punishment.
Cognizable offence
(a) if the offence is punishable with death, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years and
shall also be liable to fine.
(b) If punishable imprisonment with life or
imprisonment for ten years shall be punished with
imprisonment for three years and fine.
(c) Punishable with imprisonment for less than ten
years shall be punished with imprisonment for
1/4th of the longest term provided for the offence,
or fine or both.
S.213
Sec.251 Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration
of screening offender.
Non Cognizable
(a) Punishable with imprisonment for seven years and
fine.
(b) Punishable with imprisonment for three years and
fine.
(c) Punishable with imprisonment for 1/4th of the
longest term, provided for the offence, or fine or
both.
S.214
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 65
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.252 Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine or
with fine
S.215
Sec.253 Harboring offender who has escaped from custody or
whose apprehension has been ordered.
Cognizable offence
(a) Imprisonment for seven years and fine, if the
offender of offence punishable with death has
escaped
(b) Imprisonment for three years with or without fine.
If the offender of offence punishable imprisonment
with life or imprisonment for ten years has
escaped.
(c) Imprisonment for 1/4th of the longest term
provided for the offence, or fine, or both if the
offender of offence punishable with imprisonment
for one year and not to ten years has escaped.
S.216
Sec.254 Penalty for harboring robbers or dacoits.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with rigorous imprisonment for seven years
and fine.
S.216A
Sec.255 Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent
to save person from punishment or property from
forfeiture.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.217
Sec.256 Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with
intent to save person from punishment or property
from forfeiture.
Cognizable offence
S.218
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
66 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine,
or both
Sec.257 Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making
report, etc., contrary to law.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years, or fine,
or both.
S.219
Sec.258 Commitment for trial or confinement by person having
authority who knows that he is acting contrary to law.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years, or fine,
or both.
S.220
Sec.259 Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public
servant bound to apprehend.
(a) Cognizable or Non cognizable as per offence.
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years,
with or without fine, If the subject was charged for
the offence punishable with death
(b ) Cognizable. Punishable with imprisonment for
three years with or without fine. If the subject
was charged for the offence punishable with
imprisonment with life or imprisonment for ten
years.
(c) Cognizable. Punishable with imprisonment
for two years with or without fine, if the subject
was charged for the offence punishable with
imprisonment for less than ten Years.
S.221
Sec.260 Intentional omission to apprehend on part of public
servant bound to apprehend person under sentence or
lawfully committed.
Cognizable offence
(a) If offence is under sentence of death. Punishable
with imprisonment for life, imprisonment for
fourteen years, with or without fine.
S.222
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 67
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(b) If offence is under sentence of imprisonment for
life or imprisonment for ten years, or upwards.
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years with
or without fine.
(c) If under sentence of imprisonment for less than
ten years. Punishable with imprisonment for three
years, or fine, or both.
Sec.261 Escape from confinement or custody negligently
suffered by public servant.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.223
Sec.262 Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful
apprehension.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.224
Sec.263 Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of
another person.
Cognizable offence.
Punishable with different type of punishments for
clauses ‘a to e’ ranging from imprisonment for two
years, imprisonment for life, imprisonment for ten
years and fine etc.
S.225
Sec.264 Omission to apprehend or sufferance of escape, on
partof public servant, in cases not otherwise provided
for.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years/two
years or fine, or both (clause a & b)
S.225 A
Sec. 265 Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension or
escape or rescue in cases not otherwise provided for.
S.225 B
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
68 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for six months, or fine
or both.
Sec. 266 Violation of condition of remission of punishment.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with punishment of original sentence, or if
part of this punishment undergone, the residue.
S.227
Sec.267 Intentional insult or interruption to public servant
sitting in judicial proceeding.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with simple imprisonment of six months, or
fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.228
Sec.268 Personation of assessor.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of two years, or fine, or
both.
S.229
Sec.269 Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in
court.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of one year, or fine, or
both.
S.229 A
CHAPTER XV
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH ,SAFETY,
CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS
Sec.270 Public nuisance S.268
Sec.271 Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease
dangerous to life.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine,
or both.
S.269
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 69
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.272 Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease
dangerous to life,
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of two years, or fine, or
both.
S.270
Sec.273 Disobedience to quarantine rule.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine,
or both.
S.271
Sec.274 Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.272
Sec.275 Sale of noxious food or drink
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.273
Sec.276 Adulteration of drugs
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of one year, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.274
Sec.277 Sale of adulterated drugs
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.275
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
70 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.278 Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.276
Sec.279 Fouling water of public spring or reservoir
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Punishment & Fine increased
S.277
Sec.280 Making atmosphere noxious to health
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment or fine of one thousand
rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.278
Sec.281 Rash driving or riding on a public way
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
one thousand rupees, or both.
S.279
Sec.282 Rash navigation of vessel
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
ten thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.280
Sec.283 Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of seven years and fine
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.281
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 71
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.284 Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or over
loaded vessel
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.282
Sec.285 Danger or obstruction in public way or line of
navigation
Cognizable offence
Punishable with fine of five thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.283
Sec.286 Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months,or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.284
Sec.287 Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible
matter.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of 6 months, or fine of
two thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.285
Sec.288 Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months,or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.286
Sec.289 Negligent conduct with respect to machinery
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
S.287
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
72 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
Sec.290 Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down,
repairing or constructing buildings, etc.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.288
Sec.291 Negligent conduct with respect to animal
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.289
Sec.292 Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise
provided for.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with fine of one thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.290
Sec.293 Continuance of nuisance after injunction to
discontinue
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine of
five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.291
Sec.294
(1)& (2)
Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of two years and fine
of five thousand rupees and second or subsequent
conviction imprisonment of five years and fine of ten
thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.292
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 73
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.295 Sale, etc., of obscene objects to child
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of three years and fine
of two thousand rupees and second or subsequent
conviction imprisonment of seven years and fine of five
thousand rupees.
S.293
Sec.296 Obscene acts and songs
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of three months, or fine
of one thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Fine increased
S.294
Sec.297
(1)&(2)
Keeping lottery office
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of six months, or fine,
or both and if publishing proposal then fine of five
thousand rupees.
Note: Fine increased
S.294 A
CHAPTER XVI
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION
Sec.298 Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to
insult religion of any class
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of two years, or fine, or
both.
S.295
Sec.299 Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage
religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or
religious beliefs
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of three years, or fine,
or both.
S.295A
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
74 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.300 Disturbing religious assembly
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of one year, or fine, or
both.
S.296
Sec.301 Trespassing on burial places, etc.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of one year, or fine, or
both.
S.297
Sec.302 Uttering words etc., with deliberate intent to wound
religious feelings of any person
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of one year, or fine, or
both.
S.298
CHAPTER XVII
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
OF THEFT
Sec.303
(1)&(2)
Theft
(1) Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any
movable property out of the possession of any
person without that person’s consent in order to
such taking, is said to commit theft
(2) Cognizable and punishable with imprisonment,
which may extend to 3 years or with fine or with
both. of one year, or fine, or both and in case of
second or subsequent conviction of any person
under this section, he shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for not less than one year
but which may extend to five years and with fine
Non Cognizable
if value of property is less than five thousand
and a person is convicted for the first time, shall upon
return of the value of the property or restoration of
the stolen property shall be punished with community
service.
S.378-
S.379
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 75
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.304
(1)&(2)
Snatching
Theft is snatching, if in order to commit theft, the
offender suddenly or quickly or forcibly seizes or
secures or grabs or takes away from any person or from
his possession any movable property.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of three years and shall
also be liable to fine.
New
Provision
Sec.305 Theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation
or place of worship etc.
(a) in any building, tent or vessel used as a human
welling or used for the custody of property; or
(b) of any means of transport used for the transport of
goods or passengers; or
(c) of any article or goods from any means of transport
used for the transport of goods or passengers; or
(d) of idol or icon in any place of worship; or
(e) of any property of the Government or of a local
authority,
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of seven years and fine.
S.380
New
Additions
Sec.306 Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of
master
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment , which may extend to
seven years and with fine.
S.381
Sec.307 Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt, or
restraint in order to committing of theft
Cognizable offence
Punishable with rigorous imprisonment of ten years
and with fine.
S.382
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
76 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
OF EXTORTION
Sec.308
(1) - (7)
Extortion Illustrations
(e) A threatens Z by sending a message through
an electronic device that “your child is in my
possession, and will be put to death unless you send
me one lakh rupees”. A thus induces Z to give him
money. A has committed extortion.
Cognizable offence
(2) punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to seven years, or
with fine, or with both.
(3) if attempted to commit extortion by putting any
person in fear, of any injury, shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) if in order to the committing of extortion, put
any person in fear of death or grievous hurt,
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to seven years and
fine.
(5) if commits extortion by putting any person in fear
of death or grievous hurt, shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to ten years and fine.
(6) if in order to the committing of extortion, put
any person in fear of an acquisition of an offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life
or with imprisonment which may extend to ten
years than punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to ten years and fine.
S.383-
S.389
New
Provision
(7) if commits extortion, put any person in fear of an
acquisition of an offence punishable with death
or imprisonment for life or with imprisonment
which may extend to ten years than punishable
with imprisonment of either description which may
extend to ten years and fine.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 77
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
OF ROBBERY AND DACOITY
Sec.309
(1) to
(6)
Robbery
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
(2) … when theft is robbery
(3) … when extortion is robbery
Cognizable offence
(4) if commits robbery, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description which
may extend to ten years and fine. If robbery is
committed on highway between sunset and sunrise
than punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to fourteen years.
(5) if attempt to commits robbery, than punishable
with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to
seven years and fine.
(6) if in committing or attempting to commit
robbery, voluntarily causing hurt, than punishable
with imprisonment for life or with rigorous
imprisonment for term which may extend to ten
years and fine.
S.390
S.392
S.394
Sec.310
(1) to
(6)
Dacoity
Cognizable offence
(2) if commits dacoity, than punishable with
imprisonment for life or with rigorous
imprisonment which may extend to ten years and
fine.
(3) if while committing dacoity commits murder, than
punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, or
with rigorous imprisonment for term not less than
ten years and fine.
(4) if making preparation to commit dacoity, than
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for ten
years and fine.
(5) if assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity,
S.391
S.395
S.396
S.399
S.400
S.402
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
78 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
 than punishable with rigorous imprisonment for
term which may extend to seven years and fine.
(6) if person belongs to gang of person associated for
the purpose of habitually committing dacoity than
punishable with imprisonment for life, or with
rigorous imprisonment for term which may extend
to ten years and fine.
Sec.311 Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death, or
grievous hurt.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment of not less than seven
years.
S.397
Sec.312 Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed
with deadly weapon.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for not less than seven
years
S.398
Sec.313 Punishment for belonging to gang of robbers, etc.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with rigorous imprisonment for seven years
and fine.
S.401
OF CRIMINAL MISAPPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY
Sec.314 Dishonest misappropriation of property.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of not less than six
months but which may extend to two years and fine.
S.403
Sec.315 Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by
deceased person at the time of his death.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years and fine.
If by clerk etc than imprisonment for seven years.
S.404
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 79
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
OF CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST
Sec.316
(1) to
(5)
Criminal breach of trust
Cognizable offence
(2) if commits criminal breach of trust, Shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to five years or with fine, or with
both.
(3) if commits criminal breach of trust, of property
entrusted as a carrier, war finger or warehouse
keeper Shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description which may extend to seven years
and fine.
(4) if criminal breach of trust is committed by a clerk,
or servant entrusted with property etc., Shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to seven years and fine.
(5) if criminal breach of trust is committed by a public
servant, banker, broker etc., Shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to seven years and fine.
Note: Punishment increased
S.405-
S.409
OF RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY
Sec.317
(1) to
(5)
Stolen property
Cognizable offence
(2) if receives or retains stolen property, than
punishable with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to three years or with fine or with
both.
(3) if receives or retains stolen property transferred by
commission of dacoity etc., than punishable with
imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment
which may extend to ten years and fine.
(4) if habitually receives or deals in stolen property,
than punishable with imprisonment for life or
S.410-
S.414
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
80 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
 imprisonment of either description which may
extend to ten years and fine.
(5) if assists in concealing of stolen property, than
punishable with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to three years or with fine, or
with both.
OF CHEATING
Sec.318
(1) to
(4)
Cheating
Non Cognizable
(2) if cheats, than punishable with imprisonment of
either description which may extend to two years or
with fine, or with both.
(3) if cheats the person whose interest offender
is bound to protect, than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to five years or with fine, or with both.
Cognizable offence
(4) if cheats and dishonestly induces the person to deliver
property to any person etc, to make, alter or destroy
the whole or any part of valuable security etc., than
punishable with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to seven years and fine.
Note: Punishment increased
S.415
S.417
S.418
S.420
Sec.319
(1)
& (2)
Cheating by personation.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for five years, or fine, or
both.
S.416
S.419
OF FRAUDULENT DEEDS AND DISPOSITIONS OF PROPERTY
Sec.320 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of
property to prevent distribution among creditors.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment of not less than six months
but which may extend to two years, or fine, or both.
S.421
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 81
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec. 321 Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt
beingavailable for creditors.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years or fine, or
both.
S.422
Sec.322 Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer
containing false statement of consideration.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years or fine,
or both.
Note: Punishment increased
S.423
Sec.323 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of
property.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years or fine,
or both.
Note: Punishment increased
S.424
Sec.324
(1) to
(6)
Mischief
The offence of mischief in Section 324 of BNS has been
expanded and causing loss or damage to any property
including the property of Government or Local Authority
has been made punishable offence with imprisonment
extendable up to one year, or with fine, or with both (as
against just 6 months or with fine, or both for offence of
mischief).
In case of loss or damage is of more than 20,000
rupees but less than one lakh rupees the punishment
is extended up to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Where loss or damage is above one lakh rupees the
punishment would be imprisonment extendable up to
five years, or with fine, or with both.
Non Cognizable
(2) if commits mischief than punishable with
S.425-
S.427
S.440
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
82 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
 imprisonment of either description which may
extend to six months or with fine, or with both.
(3) if commits mischief and causes loss to government
or local authority than punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to one year or
with fine, or with both.
Note: Punishment increased
(4) if commits mischief causing loss or damage to the
amount of twenty thousand rupees and more but
less than one lakh rupees than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to two years or with fine, or with both.
Cognizable offence
(5) if commits mischief causing loss or damage of
one lakh rupees or upwards than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to five years or with fine, or with both.
(6) if commits mischief making preparation for causing
death or hurt or wrongful restraints or fear of death
etc. than punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to five years and fine.
New
Provision
Sec.325 Mischief by killing or maiming animal.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for five years or fine, or
both.
Note: Punishment increased
S.428-
S.429
Sec.326 Mischief by injury, inundation, fire or explosive
substance, etc.
Cognizable offence (a to g) except ‘e’ which is Non
Cognizable
(a) if commits mischief which causes diminution of water
supply for agriculture purpose or for food or drink
for human beings or for animal etc. than punishable
S.430-
S.436
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 83
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
 with imprisonment of either description which may
extend to five years or with fine, or with both.
(b) if commits mischief which renders any public road,
breach, navigable river etc. less safe for travelling
or conveying property than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to five years or with fine, or with both.
(c) if commits mischief which causes inundation or
an obstruction to any public drainage etc than
punishable with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to five years or with fine, or with
both.
(d) if commits mischief by destroying or moving any
sign or signal used by railways, aircraft or ship
etc than punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to seven years or
with fine, or with both.
(e) Non Cognizable if commits mischief by destroying
or moving any landmark fixed by authority
or public servant etc than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
(f) if commits mischief causing damage to any property
including agriculture produce than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to seven years and fine.
(g) if commits mischief causing destruction by fire
or any explosive substance in destruction of any
building, place of worship or as a human dwelling
etc. than punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to ten years and fine.
Sec.327
(1) &
(2)
Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a rail,
aircraft, decked vessel or one of twenty tons burden.
Cognizable offence
(1) Punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S.437-
S.438
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
84 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(2) if attempts to commit mischief by fire or any
explosive substance, shall be punished with
imprisonment of life, or may extend to ten years
and with fine.
Sec.328 Punishment for intentionally running vessel around or
ashore with intent to commit theft, etc.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for ten years and fine.
S. 439
OF CRIMINAL TRESPASS
Sec.329
(1) to
(4)
Criminal trespass and house- trespass
Cognizable offence
(3) Criminal trespass. Punishable with imprisonment
for three months, or fine of five thousand rupees,
or both.
(4) House trespass. Punishable with imprisonment for
one year, or fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
Note: Punishment increased
S.441-
S.442
S..447-
S.448
Sec.330
(1) &
(2)
House-trespass and house- breaking.
(Definition clauses )
S. 443,
S.445
Sec.331
(1) to
(8)
Punishment for house-trespass or house-breaking.
Cognizable offence
(1) if commits lurking house-trespass or house
breaking, than punishable with imprisonment for
two years and fine.
(2) if commits lurking house-trespass or house breaking
after sunset and before sunrise, than punishable with
imprisonment for three years and fine.
(3) if in order to committing lurking house-trespass
or house breaking of any offence punishable with
imprisonment, than punishable with imprisonment
of three years and fine and if theft is committed
than punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to ten years.
S.453-
S.460
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 85
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(4) if in order to committing lurking house-trespass
or house breaking of any offence punishable with
imprisonment after sunset and before sunrise, than
punishable with imprisonment of five years and
fine and if theft is committed than punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to fourteen years.
(5) if commits lurking house-trespass or house
breaking after making preparation for causing,
hurt, assault, wrongful restraint or fear of hurt or of
assault or wrongful restraint than punishable with
imprisonment of ten years and fine.
(6) if commits lurking house-trespass or house
breaking after sunset and before sunrise after
making preparation for causing, hurt, assault,
wrongful restraint or fear of hurt or of assault
or wrongful restraint than punishable with
imprisonment of fourteen years and fine.
(7) if committing lurking house-trespass or house
breaking causing grievous hurt or attempts to
cause death or grievous hurt than punishable with
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for either
description which may extend to ten years and fine.
(8) if committing lurking house-trespass or house
breaking after sunset and before sunrise causing
grievous hurt or attempts to cause death or
grievous hurt than punishable with imprisonment
for life, or imprisonment for either description
which may extend to ten years and fine.
Sec.332 House-trespass in order to commit offence.
Cognizable offence
(a) if offence is punishable with death than punishable
with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for either description which may
extend to ten years and fine.
(b) if offence is punishable with imprisonment for life,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to two years and fine.
S.449-
S.451
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
86 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
(c) if offence is punishable with imprisonment shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description
which may extend to two years and fine.
Sec.333 House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or
wrongful restraint.
Cognizable offence
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S. 452
Sec.334
(1) &
(2)
Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing
property
Cognizable offence
(1) Punishable with imprisonment for two years or
with fine or with both.
(2) If interested with any closed receptacle without
having authority to open than Punishable with
imprisonment for three years or with fine or with
both.
S.461-
S.462
CHAPTER XVIII
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND PROPERTY
MARKS
Sec.335 Making a false document S.464
Sec.336
(1) to
(4)
Forgery
Non Cognizable
(2) Punishable with imprisonment for two years or fine
or both.
Cognizable offence
(3) If forgery is for the purpose of cheating then
punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to seven years and fine.
(4) If forgery harms reputation of any party then
punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to three years and fine.
S.463
S.465
S.468
S.469
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 87
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.337 Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S.466
Sec.338 Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. or authority to
make or transfer any valuable security or to receive any
money etc.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for ten years and fine
Cognizable offence
When the valuable security is a promissory note of the
Central Government
Punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for ten years and fine
S. 467
Sec.339 Having possession of document described in section
337 or section 338, knowing it to be forged and
intending to use it as genuine.
Cognizable offence
If document is one of the descriptions mentioned in
section 337.
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years and fine
Non cognizable
If document is as one of the descriptions given in
section 338,
Punishable with imprisonment for life and
imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S. 474
Sec.340
(1) &
(2)
Forged document or electronic record and using it as
genuine.
Cognizable offence
(2) Punishable with punishment as given for forgery of
such document.
S.470-
S.471
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
88 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.341
(1) to
(4)
Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent
to commit forgery punishable under section 338.
Cognizable offence
(1) if makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or
other instrument for committing any forgery
punishable under section 338 than punishable with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of
either description which may extend to seven years
and fine.
(2) if makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other
instrument for committing any forgery punishable
other than under section 338 then punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to seven years and fine.
(3) if posses any seal, plate or other instrument
knowing the same to be counterfeited than
punishable with imprisonment of either
description which may extend to three years and
fine.
(4) if uses any seal, plate or other instrument
knowingly which are counterfeit than punishable
with imprisonment in the same manner as if he
had made or counterfeited.
S.472-
S.473
New
Provision
Sec.342
(1) &
(2)
Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating
documents described in section 338, or possessing
counterfeit marked material.
Non Cognizable
(1) If counterfeits documents described in section
338 then Punishable with imprisonment for life,
or imprisonment for either description for a term
which may extend to seven years and fine.
(2) If counterfeits documents other then section 338
then Punishable with imprisonment for seven years
and fine.
S.475-
S.476
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 89
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.343 Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will,
authority to adopt, or valuable security.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for life, or
imprisonment for seven years and fine.
S. 477
Sec.344 Falsification of accounts.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for seven years, or fine,
or both.
S.477 A
OF PROPERTY MARKS
Sec.345
(1) - (3)
Property mark
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine or
both.
S.479,
S.481,
S.482
Sec.346 Tampering with property mark with intent to cause
injury.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine or
both.
S.489
Sec. 347
(1) &
(2)
Counterfeiting a property mark.
Non Cognizable
(1 & 2 ) Punishable with imprisonment ranging from
two years to three years and fine etc.
S.483,
S.484
Sec.348 Making or possession of any instrument for
counterfeiting a property mark.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine,
or both.
S.485
Sec.349 Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.
Non Cognizable
S.486
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
90 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine, or
both.
Sec.350
(1) &
(2)
Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing
goods.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine,
or both.
S.487-
S.488
CHAPTER XIX
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, ANNOYANCE,
DEFAMATION, ETC
Sec.351
(1) to
(4)
Criminal intimidation
Non Cognizable
(2) if commits criminal intimidation than punishable
with imprisonment of either description which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) if commits criminal intimidation by threatening
to cause death or grievous hurt or destruction
of property by fire etc than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to seven years and if he impute unchastely
to a woman than punishable with imprisonment of
either description which may extend to seven years
or with fine or with both.
(4) if commits criminal intimidation by anonymous
communication etc than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to two years, in addition to the offence
provided under sub section (1).
S.503,
S.506-
S.507
Sec.352 Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of
peace.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for two years, or fine, or
both.
S.504
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 91
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
Sec.353
(1) to
(3)
Statements conducing to public mischief.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three years, or fine,
or both.
Cognizable offence
(2) if it contains false information, rumors or alarming
news etc. which is likely to create or promote
on grounds of religion, race, place of birth etc
feelings of enmity/hatred etc than punishable with
imprisonment of either description which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) if commits offence of clause (2) in place of worship
or religious ceremonies etc. than punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to five years and
fine.
S.505
Sec.354 Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be
rendered an object of Divine displeasure.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for one year, or fine, or
both.
S.508
Sec.355 Misconduct in public by a drunken person.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with simple imprisonment for twenty four
hours, or fine of one thousand rupees, or both, or with
community service.
Note: Fine increased
S.510
OF DEFAMATION
Sec.356
(1) to
(4)
Defamation
Non Cognizable
Clause (2 to 4) Punishable with simple imprisonment
for two years or fine or both or community service
S.499-
S.502
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
92 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. in
BNS Title and Chapters in BNS Sec. in
IPC
OF BREACH OF CONTRACT TO ATTEND ON AND SUPPLY WANTS
OF HELPLESS PERSON
Sec.357 Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of
helpless person.
Non Cognizable
Punishable with imprisonment for three months, or
fine of five thousand rupees, or both.
S.491
CHAPTER XX
REPEAL AND SAVINGS
Sec. 358 Repeal and savings
The Indian Penal code is hereby repealed
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 93
ANNEXURE-I
Table showing new sections
and partly added provisions
in BNS, 2023
Sec. 2 (3) In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires,–– “Child”
means any person below the age of eighteen years;
(10) “gender”.—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any
person, whether male, female or transgender.
Explanation.–“transgender” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
Sec. (k) of section 2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights)
Act, 2019;
(39) words and expressions used but not defined in this Sanhita
but defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Act and Sanhita
Sec. 4. (f) Community Service
A new form of punishment added for the 1st time for 6 offences
Sec.48 Abetment outside India for offence in India
 A person abets an offence within the meaning of this Sanhita who,
without and beyond India, abets the commission of any act in India
which would constitute an offence if committed in India.
Sec.69 Sexual intercourse by employing deceitful means, etc.
 Whoever, by deceitful means or by making promise to marry to a woman
without any intention of fulfilling the same, has sexual intercourse with
her, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.–“deceitful means” shall include inducement for, or false
promise of employment or promotion, or marrying by suppressing
identity.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
94 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Sec. 70 (2) Gang rape on women under the age of 18
 Where a woman under eighteen years of age is raped by one or more
persons constituting a group or acting in furtherance of a common
intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed
the offence of rape and shall be punished with imprisonment for life,
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life, and with fine, or with death.
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses
and rehabilitation of the victim.
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to
the victim.
Sec.95 Hiring, employing or engaging child to commit an offence.
 Whoever hires, employs or engages any child to commit an offence
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years, and
with fine; and if the offence be committed shall also be punished with
the punishment provided for that offence as if the offence has been
committed by such person himself.
 Explanation.–Hiring, employing, engaging or using a child for sexual
exploitation or pornography is covered within the meaning of this
section.
Sec.103 (2) Punishment for murder committed by five or more persons (mob
lynching)
 When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits
murder on the ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth,
language, personal belief or any other similar ground each member
of such group shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Sec. 106 (2) Punishment for causing death by rash and negligent driving of
vehicle not amounting to culpable homicide and escapes without
reporting it to a police or Magistrate soon after the incident shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description of a term
which may extend to ten years , and shall also be liable to fine.
Sec.111 Organised crime.
(1) Any continuing unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery,
vehicle theft, extortion, land grabbing, contract killing, economic
offence, cyber-crimes, trafficking of persons, drugs, weapons or 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 95
illicit goods or services, human trafficking for prostitution or
ransom, by any person or a group of persons acting in concert,
singly or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime
syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat
of violence, intimidation, coercion, or by any other unlawful
means to obtain direct or indirect material benefit including a
financial benefit, shall constitute organised crime.
Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section,––
 (i) “organised crime syndicate” means a group of two or more
persons who, acting either singly or jointly, as a syndicate
or gang indulge in any continuing unlawful activity.
 (ii) “continuing unlawful activity” means an activity prohibited
by law which is a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment of three years or more, undertaken by any
person, either singly or jointly, as a member of an organised
crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate in respect of
which more than one charge-sheets have been filed before
a competent Court within the preceding period of ten years
and that Court has taken cognizance of such offence, and
includes economic offence.
 (iii) “economic offence” includes criminal breach of trust,
forgery, counterfeiting of currency-notes, bank-notes and
Government stamps, hawala transaction, mass-marketing
fraud or running any scheme to defraud several persons
or doing any act in any manner with a view to defraud any
bank or financial institution or any other institution or
organisation for obtaining monetary benefits in any form.
(2) Whoever commits organised crime shall,—
 (a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be
punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh
rupees.
 (b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(3) Whoever abets, attempts, conspires or knowingly facilitates the
commission of an organised crime, or otherwise engages in any
act preparatory to an organised crime, shall be punished with 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
96 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
(4) Any person who is a member of an organised crime syndicate
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
five lakh rupees.
(5) Whoever, intentionally, harbours or conceals any person who has
committed the offence of an organised crime shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees.
 Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the
harbour or concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
(6) Whoever possesses any property derived or obtained from the
commission of an organised crime or proceeds of any organised
crime or which has been acquired through the organised crime,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than
two lakh rupees.
(7) If any person on behalf of a member of an organised crime
syndicate is, or at any time has been in possession of movable or
immovable property which he cannot satisfactorily account for,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than three years but which may extend to imprisonment
for ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees.
Sec.112 Petty organised crime.
(1) Whoever, being a member of a group or gang, either singly or
jointly, commits any act of theft, snatching, cheating, unauthorised
selling of tickets, unauthorised betting or gambling, selling of
public examination question papers or any other similar criminal
act, is said to commit petty organised crime.
 Explanation.–For the purposes of this sub-section "theft" includes
trick theft, theft from vehicle, dwelling house or business premises,
cargo theft, pick pocketing, theft through card skimming, shoplifting
and theft of Automated Teller Machine.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 97
(2) Whoever commits any petty organised crime shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one
year but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
Sec. 113 Terrorist act
(1) Whoever does any act with the intent to threaten or likely to
threaten the unity, integrity, sovereignty, security, or economic
security of India or with the intent to strike terror or likely to
strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or
in any foreign country: -
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substance or
inflammable substance or firearms or other lethal weapons or
poisonous or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other
substance (whether biological, radioactive, nuclear or otherwise)
of a hazardous nature or by any other means of whatever nature
to cause or likely to cause,-
 (i) death of, or injury to, any person or persons; or
 (ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
 (iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of
the community in India or in any foreign country; or
 (iv) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of
production or smuggling or circulation of counterfeit
Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material; or
 (v) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a
foreign country used or intended to be used for the defence
of India or in connection with any other purposes of the
Government of India, any State Government or any of their
agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force
or attempts to do so or causes death of any public functionary or
attempts to cause death of any public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatening to kill or
injure such person or does any other act in order to compel the
Government of India, any State Government or the Government
of a foreign country or an international or inter-governmental
organisation or any other person to do or abstain from doing any
act, commit a terrorist act.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
98 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Explanation.–For the purpose of this sub-section,-
 (a) “public functionary” means the constitutional authorities
or any other functionary notified in the Official Gazette by
the Central Government as public functionary;
 (b) “counterfeit Indian currency” means the counterfeit
currency as may be declared after examination by an
authorised or notified forensic authority that such currency
imitates or compromises with the key security features of
Indian currency.
(2) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall,-
 (a) if such offence has resulted in the death of any person, be
punished with death or imprisonment for life, and shall
also be liable to fine;
 (b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
(3) Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets,
advises or incites, directly or knowingly facilitates the commission
of a terrorist act or any act preparatory to the commission of
a terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or camps
for imparting training in terrorist act, or recruits or causes to be
recruited any person or persons for commission of a terrorist act,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Any person who is a member of an organisation which is involved
in terrorist act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(6) Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour
or conceal any person knowing that such person has committed
a terrorist act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine:
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 99
 Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any case in which the
harbour or concealment is by the spouse of the offender.
(7) Whoever knowingly possesses any property derived or obtained
from commission of any terrorist act or acquired through
the commission of any terrorist act shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
 Explanation.–For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police shall decide
whether to register the case under this section or under the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
Sec.117 (3) Grievous hurt causing permanent disability or persistent
vegetative state.
 Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) and in the course
of such commission causes any hurt to a person which causes that
person to be in permanent disability or in persistent vegetative state,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s
natural life.
(4) Hurt caused by a mob
 When a group of five or more persons acting in concert, causes grievous
hurt to a person on the ground of his race, caste or community, sex,
place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground,
each member of such group shall be guilty of the offence of causing
grievous hurt, and shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine.
Sec. 143 (1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation recruits, transports,
harbours, transfers, or receives a person or persons Explanation
1.—The expression “exploitation” shall include any act of physical
exploitation or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery or
practices similar to slavery, servitude, beggary or forced removal
of organs.
 Explanation.–The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination
of the offence of trafficking.
Sec.152 Acts endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India
 Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
100 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
or by signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication
or by use of financial mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite,
secession or armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages
feelings of separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and
integrity of India; or indulges in or commits any such act shall be
punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
 Explanation.–Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures,
or administrative or other action of the Government with a view to
obtain their alteration by lawful means without exciting or attempting
to excite the activities referred to in this section do not constitute an
offence under this section.
Sec. 195 Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.
(2) Whoever threatens to assault or attempts to obstruct any public
servant or threatens or attempts to use criminal force to any
public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant
in endeavoring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress
a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
Sec. 197 Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration.
(d) makes or publishes false or misleading information, jeopardizing
the sovereignty, unity and integrity or security of India,
Sec. 226 Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restraint exercise of lawful
power
 Whoever attempts to commit suicide with the intent to compel or
restrain any public servant from discharging his official duty shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both, or with community service.
Sec. 303 Theft
(2) Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both and in case of second or subsequent
conviction of any person under this section, he shall be punished
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one year but which may extend to five years and with fine:
 Provided that in cases of theft where the value of the stolen property is
less than five thousand rupees, and a person is convicted for the first 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 101
time, shall upon return of the value of property or restoration of the
stolen property, shall be punished with community service.
Sec. 304 Snatching
(1) Theft is snatching if, in order to commit theft, the offender
suddenly or quickly or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or
takes away from any person or from his possession any movable
property.
(2) Whoever commits snatching, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Sec. 305 Whoever commits theft
(b) of any means of transport used for the transport of goods or
passengers; or
(c) of any article or goods from any means of transport used for the
transport of goods or passengers; or
(d) of idol or icon in any place of worship; or
(e) of any property of the Government or of a local authority,
Sec. 308 Extortion Illustration (e)
 A threatens Z by sending a message through an electronic device that
“Your child is in my possession, and will be put to death unless you
send me one lakh rupees.” A thus induces Z to give him money. A has
committed extortion.
Sec. 324 Mischiefs
(3) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage
to any property including the property of Government or
Local Authority shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage
to the amount of twenty thousand rupees and more but less than
one lakh rupees, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both
(5) Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage
to the amount of one lakh rupees or upwards,shall be punished 
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
102 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Sec. 341 Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc. with intent to commit
forgery punishable u/s 338 of BNS
(3) Whoever possesses any seal, plate or other instrument knowing
the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses as genuine any seal,
plate or other instrument knowing or having reason to believe
the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished in the same manner
as if he had made or counterfeited such seal, plate or other
instrument
Sec. 358 Repeal and savings
(1) The Indian Penal Code is hereby repealed.
(2) Not withstanding the repeal of the Code referred to in subsection (1), it shall not affect,-
 (a) the previous operation of the Code so repealed or anything
duly done or suffered thereunder; or
 (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued
or incurred under the Code so repealed; or
 (c) any penalty, or punishment incurred in respect of any
offences committed against the Code so repealed; or
 (d) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty,
or punishment; or
 (e) any proceeding, investigation or remedy in respect of any
such penalty or punishment as aforesaid, and any such
proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty may be imposed as if that
Code had not been repealed.
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the said Code shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita.
(4) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not
be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6
of the General Clauses Act,1897 with regard to the effect of the
repeal.
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 103
ANNEXURE-II
List of IPC Sections, which
have been deleted/repealed
in BNS 2023
Old Sec.
of IPC Title/Description
Sec. 14 Servant of Government -The words “servant of government
denote any officer or servant continued, appointed or employed
in India by or under the authority of Government.
Sec.18 India
50 “Section”. —The word “section” denotes one of those portions
of a Chapter of this Code which are distinguished by prefixed
numeral figures.
53 A Construction of reference to transportation
124 A Sedition
153 AA Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession
236 Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin
237 Import or export of counterfeit coin
238 Import or export of counterfeits of Indian Coin
264 Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing
265 Fraudulent use of false weight or measure
266 Being in possession of false weight or measure
267 Making or selling false weight or measure
309 Attempt to commit suicide
310 Thug
311 Punishment of Thug
377 Sexual intercourse against the order of nature
444 Lurking house trespass at night
446 House breaking at night
497 Adultery
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
104 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
ANNEXURE-III
List of sections in which
Punishment has been
increased in BNS
S.
No. New Section and Punishment Old Section with
Punishment
1 8(5) amount of fine, liability in default of
payment of fine or in default of community
service, (c) - 1 year
67- (c)- six months
2 57- Abetting commission of offence by public
or by more than ten persons, -imprisonment of
either description which may extend to seven
years and with fine
117- 3 years, or with
fine, or both
3 99- shall not be less than seven years but may
extend to 14 years
373- may extend to
10 years
4 104- punishable with death or with
imprisonment for life, which shall mean the
remainder of that person’s natural life
303- punished with
death
5 105- a term which may extend to 10 years and
with fine
304-term which may
extend to 10 years, or
fine, or both
6 106(1)- may extend to 2 years for medicalpractitioner , may extend to 5 years for others
, and shall also be liable to fine 106(2) may
extend to ten years and shall also liable to fine
304A- may extend to
2 years, or with fine,
or both
7 109(2)- punished with death or imprisonment
for life, which shall mean the remainder of that
person’s natural life.
307(2)- punished
with death
8 121(1)- voluntary causing hurt or grievous
hurt to deter public servant from his duty- may
extend to 5 years
332- which may
extend to 3 years
9 122(2)- voluntary causing hurt or grievous hurt
on provocation- may extend to 5 years
335- may extend to
four years
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 105
S.
No. New Section and Punishment Old Section with
Punishment
10 125(b)- an act endangering life and personal
safety of others where grievous hurt is causedmay extend to 3 years
338- may extend to 2
years
11 127(3)- wrongful confinement for three days or
more-may extend to 3 years
343- may extend to 2
years
12 127(4)- wrongful confinement for ten days or
more-may extend to 5 years
344- may extend to 3
years
13 127(6)-wrongful confinement from any
person interested in person or from any public
servant- may extend to 3 years
346- may extend to 2
years
14 144(1)- exploitation of a trafficked child for
engaging such child for sexual exploitation- 10
years
370A(1)- 7 years
15 144(2)-exploitation of trafficked person to
engage such person for sexual exploitation- 7
years
370A(2)- 5 years
16 166-abetment of act of insubordination by
soldier, sailor and airman- 2 years
138- 6 months
17 191(3)-rioting armed with a deadly weapon to
cause death etc- 5 years
148(3)- 3 years
18 217-false information with intent to cause
public servant use his lawful power to injury of
another person- 1 year
182- 6 months
19 223(a)- disobedience to order duly
promulgated by public servant to cause
obstruction etc. 6 months
188(a)- 1 month
20 223(b)- disobedience to order duly
promulgated by public servant to cause danger
to human life etc.-1 year
188(b)- 6 months
21 241-destruciotn of document or electronic
record to prevent its production as evidence- 3
years
204- 2 years
22 243- fraudulent removal or concealment of
property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in
execution-3 years
206- 2 years
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
106 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
S.
No. New Section and Punishment Old Section with
Punishment
23 248(a)-false charge of offence made with intent
to injure- 5 years
211(a)- 2 years
24 248(b)- whenever no criminal proceeding is
instituted -10 years
211(b)- 7 years
25 276- adulteration of drugs-1 year 274- 6 months
26 279- fouling water of public spring or reservoir6 months
277- 3 months
27 316(2)- commits criminal breach of trust -5
years
406- 3 years
28 318(2)- whoever cheats -3 years 417- 1 year
29 318(3)- whoever cheats with the knowledge to
cause wrongful loss-5 years
418- 3 years
30 322- dishonest or fraudulent execution of
deed of transfer containing false statement of
consideration-3 years
423- 2 years
31 323- dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property- 3 years
424- 2 years
32 324(2)-whoever commits mischief 6 months 426- 3 months
33 325- mischief by killing or maiming animal-5
years
428- 2 years
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 107
ANNEXURE-IV
List of sections where
punishment of fine has
been enhanced in BNS
S.
No. New Section and enhanced Fine Old Section and
Fine
1 Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of
fine etc 8(5)(a), In default of fine not exceeding Rs.
5000, Imprisonment of two months
67- (a)- 50
rupees
2 Amount of fine, liability in default of payment of
fine etc 8(5)(b)- In default of fine not exceeding Rs.
10000, Imprisonment of four months
67- (b)- 100
rupees
3 115(2) Voluntary causing hurt, fine of 10,000 rupees 323- 1000 rupees
4 118(1) Voluntary causing hurt or grievous hurt
by dangerous weapons or means, fine which may
extend to twenty thousand rupees
324- or with fine
5 122(1) Voluntary causing hurt on provocation -
5000 rupees
334- 500 rupees
6 122(2)- Voluntary causing grievous hurt by
provocation, 10,000 rupees
335- 2000 rupees
7 125- Act endangering life or personal safety of
others 2,500 rupees
336- 250 rupees
8 125(a)- Act endangering life or personal safety of
others where hurt is caused --5000 rupees
337- 500 rupees
9 125(b)- Act endangering life or personal safety of
others where grievous hut is caused -- 10,000 rupees
338- 1000 rupees
10 126(2)- wrongful restraint - 5000 rupees 341- 500 rupees
11 127(2)- wrongful confinement --5000 rupees 342- 1000 rupees
12 127(3)- wrongfully confined for 3 days or more
--10,000 rupees
343- or with fine
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
108 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
S.
No. New Section and enhanced Fine Old Section and
Fine
13 127(4)- wrongfully confined for 10 days or more
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less
than 10,000 rupees
345- shall also be
liable to fine
14 127(5)- wrongfully confined knowing that a writ
for liberation has been issued –shall also be liable to
fine
345, Nil fine
15 127(6)- wrongfully confined so that his confinement
may not known to any person interested in that
person or any public servant --shall also be liable to
fine
346 – Nil Fine
16 131-punishment for assault and criminal force
otherwise than grave provocation 1000 rupees
352- 500 rupees
17 135- assault or criminal force in attempt to
wrongfully confine a person -5000 rupees
357- 1000 rupees
18 136- assault or criminal force on grave
provocation-1000 rupees
358- 200 rupees
19 165-desserter concealed on board merchant vessel
through negligence of master- 3000 rupees
137- 500 rupees
20 168- wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier,
sailor or airman- 2000 rupees
140- 500 rupees
21 176-illegal payments in c/w election- 10,000 rupees 171H- 500
rupees
22 177-failiure to keep election accounts- 5000 rupees 171I- 500 rupees
23 182(1)- making or using documents resembling
currency or bank notes-300 rupees
489E(1)- 100
rupees
24 182(2)- a person whose name appears on a
document the making of which is an offence refuses
to disclose to a police officer on being so required
the name and add of the person by whom it was
printed or otherwise. - 600 rupees
489E(2)- 200
rupees
25 194(2)-affray 1000 rupees 160- 100 rupees
26 195(1)- assaulting or obstructing a public servant
when suppressing a riot etc. shall not be less than
25,000 rupees.
152- with fine.
27 205- wearing garb or carrying token used by public
servant with fraudulent intent -5000 rupees
171- 200 rupees
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 109
S.
No. New Section and enhanced Fine Old Section and
Fine
28 206(a)-absconding to avoid service of summons or
their proceedings issued by public servants- 5000
rupees
172(a)- 500
rupees
29 206(b)- absconding to avoid service of summons or
their proceedings issued by Court- 10,000 rupees
172(b)- 1000
rupees
30 207(a)- preventing service or summons or other
proceedings or preventing publication thereof
issued by public servant-5000 rupees
173(a)- 500
rupees
31 207(b)- preventing service or summons or
other proceedings or preventing publication thereof
issued by court- 10,000 rupees
173(b)- 1,000
rupees
32 208(a)-Non attendance in obedience to an order
before public servant -5000 rupees
174(a)- 500
rupees
33 208(b)- Non attendance in obedience to an order
before court -10,000 rupees
174(b)- 1000
rupees
34 210(a)- omission to produce document or electronic
record to public servant by person legally bound to
produce it-5000 rupees
175(a)- 500
rupees
35 210(b)- omission to produce document or
electronic record to public servant by person legally
bound to produce before court-10,000 rupees
175(b)- 1,000
rupees
36 211(a)- omission to give notice or information to
public servant by person legally bound to give it5000 rupees
176(a)- 500
rupees
37 211(b)- omission to give notice or information to
public servant by person legally bound to give it
regarding commission of offence or prevention
or apprehension of offender of an offence- 10,000
rupees
176(b)- 1000
rupees
38 212(a)-furnishing false information to public
servant- 5000 rupees
177- 1000 rupees
39 213-refusing oath or affirmation when duly required
by public servant to make it- 5000 rupees
178- 1000 rupees
40 214- refusing to answer-5000 rupees 179- 1000 rupees
41 215-refusing to sign statement- 3,000 rupees 180- 500 rupees
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
110 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
S.
No. New Section and enhanced Fine Old Section and
Fine
42 217-false information with intent to cause public
servant to use his lawful power to injury to another
person- 10,000 rupees
182- 1000 rupees
43 218- resistance to taking of property by lawful
authority of a public servant-10,000 rupees
183- 1000 rupees
44 219- obstructing sale of property occurred for sale
by authority of public servant-5,000 rupees
184- 500 rupees
45 221-obstrucitng public servant in discharge of
public functions- 2,500 rupees
186- 500 rupees
46 222(a)- omission to assist public servant when
bound by law to give assistance -2,500 rupees
187(a)- 200
rupees
47 222(b)-omission to assist public servant when
bound by law to give assistance for the purpose of
executing any process lawfully issued by a court for
preventing of certain offences- 5,000 rupees
187(b)- 500
rupees
48 223(a)-disobedience to order duly promulgated
by public servant where such disobedience cause
obstruction etc.- 2,500 rupees
188(a)- 200
rupees
49 223(b)- disobedience to order duly promulgated by
public servant where such disobedience danger to
human life etc.- 5,000 rupees
188(b)- 1000
rupees
50 229(1)- punishment for false evidence in an any
stage of a judicial proceedings etc.-liable to fine
which may extend to 10,000 rupees
193(1)- liable to
fine
51 229(2)- punishment for false evidence other than
judicial proceedings etc -liable to fine which may
extend to 5,000rupees
193(2)- liable to
fine
52 230(1)-giving or fabricating false evidence with
intent to procure capital offences- liable to fine
which may extend to 50,000 rupees
194(1)- liable to
fine
53 239-intentional omission to give information of
offence by person bound to inform- or with fine
which may extend to 5000 rupees
237- or with fine
54 241-destruciton of evidence or electronic record
to prevent its production as evidence- or with fine
which may extend to 5000 rupees
239- or with fine
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 111
S.
No. New Section and enhanced Fine Old Section and
Fine
55 243- fraudulent removal or concealment of property
to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution- or
with fine which may extend to 5000 rupees
241- or with fine
56 248- false charge of offence made with intent to
injure-or with fine which may extend to two lakh
rupees
211- or with fine
57 267-intentinal insult or interruption to public
servant seating in judicial proceeding- 5000 rupees
228- 1000 rupees
58 274-adulteration of food or drink intended for sale5000 rupees
272- 1000 rupees
59 275-sale of noxious food or drink- 5000 rupees 273- 1000 rupees
60 276-adultration of drugs- 5000 rupees 274- 1000 rupees
61 277- sale of adulterated drugs-5000 rupees 275- 1000 rupees
62 278-sale of drug as a different drug or prepration5000 rupees
276- 1000 rupees
63 279- fouling water of public spring or reservoir
-5000 rupees
277- 500 rupees
64 280- making atmosphere noxious to health-1000
rupees
278- 500 rupees
65 282-rash navigation of vessel- 10,000 rupees 280- 1000 rupees
66 283-exhibition of false light mark of buoy- and with
fine which shall not be less than 10,000 rupees, or
with both
281- or with fine
67 284- conveying person by water for heir in an
unsafe or overloaded vessel-5,000 rupees
282- 1000 rupees
68 285- danger or obstruction in public way or line of
navigation-5000 rupees
283- 200 rupees
69 286- negligent conduct w.r.t poisonous
substance-5,000 rupees
284- 1000 rupees
70 287-negligent conduct w.r.t fire or combustible
matter- 2,000 rupees
285- 1000 rupees
71 288-negligent conduct w.r.t explosive substance5,000 rupees
286- 1000 rupees
72 289- negligent conduct w.r.t machinery-5,000
rupees
287- 1000 rupees
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
112 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
S.
No. New Section and enhanced Fine Old Section and
Fine
73 290-negligent conduct w.r.t cooling down, repairing
or constructing building etc. 5,000 rupees
288- 1000 rupees
74 291-negligent conduct w.r.t animal- 5,000 rupees 289- 1000 rupees
75 292-punishmentfor public nuisance in cases not
otherwise provided for-1,000 rupees
290- 200 rupees
76 293- continuance of nuisance after injection to
discontinue - or with fine which may extend to 5000
rupees
291- or with fine
77 294(2)-sale etc. of obscene books etc on first
conviction- 5000 rupees
292(2)- 2000
rupees
78 294(2)- sale etc. of obscene books etc on second
subsequent conviction- 10,000 rupees (second time)
292(2) 5000
rupees
79 296-obscene acts and songs- or with fine which may
extend to 1000 rupees
294- or with fine
80 297(2)-keeping lottery office/publishes any proposal
to pay and sum etc.- 5000 rupees
294A- 1000
rupees
81 329(3)- commits criminal tress pass- 5000 rupees 447- 500 rupees
82 329(4)-commits house tress pass- 5000 rupees 448- 1000 rupees
83 355-miscondcut in public by a drunken person1000 rupees
510- 10 rupees
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 113
ANNEXURE-V
List of Sec. in which
Mandatory Minimum
Punishment Introduced in
BNS
S.
No. Section Heading Minimum Punishment
1 Sec. 99 Buying Child for
Purposes of Prostitution,
etc.
shall not be less than
seven years
2 Sec. 105 Punishment For
Culpable Homicide Not
Amounting to Murder.
shall not be less than five
years
3 Sec. 111(2) (b) Organised Crime. or a term which shall not
be less than five years
but which may extend
to imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees
4 Sec. 111(3) Abetting, attempting etc.
of an Organised Crime.
which shall not be less
than five years and shall
also be liable to fine
which shall not be less
than five lakh rupees
5 Sec. 111(4) Being a member of
Organised Crime
shall not be less than five
years
6 Sec. 111(5) shall not be less than
three years and shall also
be liable to fine which
shall not be less than five
lakh rupees
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
114 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
S.
No. Section Heading Minimum Punishment
7 Sec. 111 (6) Possessing property
derived from Organised
Crime.
shall not be less than
three years and shall also
be liable to fine which
shall not be less than two
lakh rupees
8 Sec.111 (7) Possession of property
on behalf of member of
Organised Crime.
shall not be less than
three years and shall also
be liable to fine which
shall not be less than one
lakh rupees
9 Sec. 112 (2) Petty Organised Crime shall not be less than
one year but which may
extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to
fine
10 Sec. 113 (2) (b) Terrorist Act. which shall not be less
than five years.
11 Sec. 113(3) Abetting, attempting etc.
of Terrorist Act.
Shall not be less than five
years
12 Sec. 113(4) Organising a camp for
Terrorist Act.
shall not be less than five
years
13 Sec. 113(6) Harboring any person
who has committed any
terrorist Act.
which shall not be less
than three years
14 Sec. 117(3) Voluntarily Causing
Grievous Hurt resulting
in permanent vegetative
state
which shall not be less
than ten years
15 Sec. 118(2) Voluntarily Causing Hurt
or Grievous Hurt by
Dangerous Weapons or
Means.
shall not be less than one
year
16 Sec. 121(2) Voluntarily Causing
Hurt or Grievous Hurt
to Deter Public Servant
from His Duty.
shall not be less than one
year
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 115
S.
No. Section Heading Minimum Punishment
17 Sec. 139(1) Kidnapping or Maiming
a Child for Purposes of
Begging.
shall not be less than ten
years
18 Sec. 139(2) Kidnapping or Maiming
a Child for Purposes of
Begging.
shall not be less than
twenty years
19 Sec. 204 Personating A Public
Servant
shall not be less than six
months
20 Sec. 303(2) Theft. shall not be less than one
year
21 Sec. 310(3) Dacoity shall not be less than ten
years
22 Sec. 314 Dishonest
Misappropriation of
Property
shall not be less than six
months
23 Sec. 320 Dishonest or Fraudulent
Removal or Concealment
of Property To Prevent
Distribution Among
Creditors
shall not be less than six
months
BNS Handbook Delhi Police Academy
116 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
1. What are Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)?
IPR is a general term covering patents, copyright, trademark, industrial designs,
geographical indications, layout design of integrated circuits, undisclosed information
(trade secrets) and new plant varieties.
2. What are the legislations covering IPRs in India?
Patents: The Patents Act, 1970 as amended in 1999, 2002 and 2005
Design: The Designs Act, 2000
Trade Mark: The Trade Marks Act, 1999
Copyright: The Copyright Act, 1957 as amended in 1983, 1984 and 1992, 1994, 1999
Layout Design of Integrated Circuits: The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout
Design Act, 2000
Protection of Undisclosed Information: No exclusive legislation exists but the matter
would be generally covered under the Contract Act, 1872
Geographical Indications: The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and
Protection) Act, 1999
Plant Varieties: The Protection of Plant Variety and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001
3. Who are responsible for administration of IPRs in the country?
Patents, designs, trademarks and geographical indications are administered by the
Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks which is under the control of the
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
Copyright is under the charge of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The Act
on Layout-Design of Integrated Circuits is administered by the Ministry of
Telecommunication and Information Technology. Protection of Plant Varieties and
Farmers’ Rights Authority, Ministry of Agriculture administers the Act on Plant Variety.
..1..
Patents
4. What is a patent?
A patent is an exclusive ownership right granted by a country to the owner of an
invention, provided the invention satisfies certain conditions stipulated in the law. A
Letters Patent (a kind of certificate) is issued to the owner of the invention by the patent
office of the country conferring this right. Exclusivity of right implies that no one else
can make, use, manufacture or market the invention without the consent of the patent
holder. This right is available to the owner of the invention only for a limited period of
time. However, the use or exploitation of a patent may be affected by other laws of the
country which has awarded the patent. These laws may relate to health, safety, food,
security etc.
A patent in the law is a property right and hence, it can be gifted, inherited, assigned, sold
or licensed. As the right is conferred by the State, it can be revoked by the State under
very special circumstances for the benefit of public even if the patent has been sold or
licensed or manufactured or marketed in the meantime. The patent right is territorial in
nature meaning thereby, that a patent granted in India can only be enforced in India. In
case the owner of the invention wishes to obtain patents in other countries, the owner will
have to file separate patent applications in countries of his interest, along with necessary
fees.
5. What is expected from patentee as an obligation to the State?
A patentee must disclose the invention in a patent document for people to practice it after
the expiry of the term of the patent or after the patent has lapsed due to nonpayment of
maintenance fee or practice it with the consent of the patent holder during the life of the
patent. Disclosure of an invention is a legal requirement for obtaining a patent.
6. How is invention defined in the Indian Patents Act, which can qualify for grant of
a patent?
Invention means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of
industrial application.
Capable of industrial application means that the invention is capable of being made or
used in an industry.
7. How do you explain the term ‘a new product or a process’?
An invention is considered new or novel if it is not known to the public through
publication or prior use anywhere in the world. The invention should not be a part of the
existing global state of the art. Information appearing in magazines, technical journals,
..2..
books, newspapers, published patents etc. constitute the state of the art. Oral description
of the invention in a seminar/conference can also spoil novelty. Novelty is always
assessed in the global context. An invention will cease to be novel if it has been disclosed
in public through any type of publications anywhere in the world before filing a patent
application in respect of the invention. Prior use of the invention before the filing date
can also destroy the novelty. Novelty is determined through extensive literature and
patent searches. It should be realized that patent search is essential and critical for
ascertaining novelty as most of the information reported in patent documents does not
usually get published anywhere else or it is published in technical literature after a fairly
long gap.
8. How is inventiveness defined in the Indian Patents Act? Explain the meaning of
the term.
Inventive step is defined as a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as
compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that
makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art.
A person skilled in the art means a person having knowledge and skill in the subject
matter of the patent application. This term has not been defined in terms of educational
qualifications and experience. Inventiveness is different from novelty in the sense that an
invention must lead to a technical advance. Replacement of a wooden knob in an almirah
by a metallic knob is not considered inventive. A substantial degree of interpretation is
called for in determining the inventiveness. Inventiveness cannot be decided on the basis
of the material contained in unpublished patents. This would mean that while deciding
inventiveness of an invention one has to examine it in the light of published information
on the date of filing of the patent application. The complexity or the simplicity of an
inventive step does not have any bearing on the grant of a patent. In other words a very
simple invention can qualify for a patent. A mere 'scintilla' of invention is sufficient to
found a valid patent.
9. What are the types of inventions which are not patentable in India?
An invention may satisfy the condition of novelty, inventiveness and usefulness but it
may not qualify for a patent under the following situations:
(i) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to
well established natural laws;
(ii) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which
could be contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice
to human , animal or plant life or health or to the environment;
(iii) the mere discovery of scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract
theory or discovery of any living thing or non-living substance occurring in
nature;
(iv) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result
in enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery
of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a
..3..
known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a
new product or employs at least one new reactant;
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs,
metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes,
combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to
be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with
regards to efficacy.
(v) a substance obtained by mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the
properties of the components thereof or a process for producing such
substance;
(vii) the mere arrangement or re-arrangement or duplication of known devices each
functioning independently of one another in a known way;
(ix) a method of agriculture or horticulture;
(x) any process for medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic (diagnostic,
therapeutic) or other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar
treatment of animals to render them free of disease or to increase their
economic value or that of their products;
(xi) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than microorganisms but
including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for
production or propagation of plants and animals;
(xii) a mathematical or business method or a computer program per se or
algorithms;
(xiii) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation
whatsoever including cinematographic works and television productions;
(xiv) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method of
playing game;
(xv) a presentation of information;
(xvi) topography of integrated circuits;
(xvii) an invention which, in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an
aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known
component or components;
(xviii) inventions relating to atomic energy;
10. When should an application for a patent be filed?
Filing of an application for a patent should be completed at the earliest possible date and
should not be delayed. An application filed with provisional specification, disclosing the
essence of the nature of the invention helps to register the priority by the applicant. Delay
in filing an application may entail some risks such as (i) some other inventor might file a
patent application on the said invention and (ii) there may be either an inadvertent
publication of the invention by the inventor himself/herself or by others independently of
him/her.
11. Can a published or disclosed invention be patented?
..4..
No. Publication of an invention in any form by the inventor before filing of a patent
application would disqualify the invention to be patentable. However, a grace period of
12 months is available in India for filing a patent application after disclosure of the
invention through publication or display. This grace period is available only when such
publications or displays are done in government notified exhibitions or paper read before
learned society. A patent application must be filed before the grace period ends. A
practical advice to inventors is that they should try to utilize the grace period only under
special circumstances. As a matter of sound practice they should not disclose their
invention before filing the patent application. The invention can be considered for
publication after a patent application has been filed. Thus, it can be seen that there is no
contradiction between publishing an inventive work and filing a patent application in
respect of the invention.
12. What is considered as the date of patent?
The date of patent is the date of filing the application for patent (whether provisional or
complete). The term of the patent is counted from this date.
13. What is the term of a patent in the Indian system?
Term of the patent is 20 years from the date of filing for all types of inventions.
14. How does one keep a patent in force for the full patent term?
A patent has to be maintained by paying the maintenance fees every year. If the
maintenance fees are not paid, the patent will cease to remain in force and the invention
becomes open to public. Anyone can then utilize the patent without the danger of
infringing the patent.
15. What are the essential documents to be generated and submitted by a potential
patentee?
There are two types of patent documents usually known as patent specification, namely
(i) Provisional Specification and (ii) Complete Specification
Provisional Specification
A provisional specification is usually filed to establish priority of the invention in case
the disclosed invention is only at an early stage and a delay is .
1
Chapter 19
Cyber Laws in India
Objectives: This chapter presents the meaning and definition of cyber crime, the legislation in India
dealing with offences relating to the use of or concerned with the abuse of computers or other electronic
gadgets. The Information Technology Act 2000 and the I.T. Amendment Act 2008 have been dealt
with in detail and other legislations dealing with electronic offences have been discussed in brief.
Introduction:
Crime is both a social and economic phenomenon. It is as old as human society. Many ancient
books right from pre-historic days, and mythological stories have spoken about crimes
committed by individuals be it against another individual like ordinary theft and burglary or
against the nation like spying, treason etc. Kautilya’s Arthashastra written around 350 BC,
considered to be an authentic administrative treatise in India, discusses the various crimes,
security initiatives to be taken by the rulers, possible crimes in a state etc. and also advocates
punishment for the list of some stipulated offences. Different kinds of punishments have been
prescribed for listed offences and the concept of restoration of loss to the victims has also been
discussed in it.
Crime in any form adversely affects all the members of the society. In developing economies, cyber
crime has increased at rapid strides, due to the rapid diffusion of the Internet and the digitisation of
economic activities. Thanks to the huge penetration of technology in almost all walks of society right
from corporate governance and state administration, up to the lowest level of petty shop keepers
computerizing their billing system, we find computers and other electronic devices pervading the
human life. The penetration is so deep that man cannot spend a day without computers or a mobile.
Snatching some one’s mobile will tantamount to dumping one in solitary confinement!
Cyber Crime is not defined in Information Technology Act 2000 nor in the I.T. Amendment Act 2008
nor in any other legislation in India. In fact, it cannot be too. Offence or crime has been dealt with
elaborately listing various acts and the punishments for each, under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
quite a few other legislations too. Hence, to define cyber crime, we can say, it is just a combination of
crime and computer. To put it in simple terms ‘any offence or crime in which a computer is used is a
cyber crime’. Interestingly even a petty offence like stealing or pick-pocket can be brought within the
broader purview of cyber crime if the basic data or aid to such an offence is a computer or an
information stored in a computer used (or misused) by the fraudster. The I.T. Act defines a computer,
computer network, data, information and all other necessary ingredients that form part of a cyber crime,
about which we will now be discussing in detail.
In a cyber crime, computer or the data itself the target or the object of offence or a tool in committing
some other offence, providing the necessary inputs for that offence. All such acts of crime will come
under the broader definition of cyber crime.
2
Let us now discuss in detail, the Information Technology Act -2000 and the I.T. Amendment Act 2008
in general and with particular reference to banking and financial sector related transactions. Before
going into the section-wise or chapter-wise description of various provisions of the Act, let us discuss
the history behind such a legislation in India, the circumstances under which the Act was passed and the
purpose or objectives in passing it.
The Genesis of IT legislation in India: Mid 90’s saw an impetus in globalization and computerisation,
with more and more nations computerizing their governance, and e-commerce seeing an enormous
growth. Until then, most of international trade and transactions were done through documents being
transmitted through post and by telex only. Evidences and records, until then, were predominantly
paper evidences and paper records or other forms of hard-copies only. With much of international trade
being done through electronic communication and with email gaining momentum, an urgent and
imminent need was felt for recognizing electronic records ie the data what is stored in a computer or an
external storage attached thereto.
The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) adopted the Model Law on
e-commerce in 1996. The General Assembly of United Nations passed a resolution in January 1997
inter alia, recommending all States in the UN to give favourable considerations to the said Model Law,
which provides for recognition to electronic records and according it the same treatment like a paper
communication and record.
Objectives of I.T. legislation in India: . It is against this background the Government of India
enacted its Information Technology Act 2000 with the objectives as follows, stated in the preface to the
Act itself.
“to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and
other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as "electronic commerce", which
involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of communication and storage of information, to
facilitate electronic filing of documents with the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian
Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934 and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
The Information Technology Act, 2000, was thus passed as the Act No.21 of 2000, got President assent
on 9 June and was made effective from 17 October 2000.
The Act essentially deals with the following issues:
 Legal Recognition of Electronic Documents
 Legal Recognition of Digital Signatures
 Offenses and Contraventions
 Justice Dispensation Systems for cyber crimes.
Amendment Act 2008: Being the first legislation in the nation on technology, computers and ecommerce and e-communication, the Act was the subject of extensive debates, elaborate reviews and
detailed criticisms, with one arm of the industry criticizing some sections of the Act to be draconian and
other stating it is too diluted and lenient. There were some conspicuous omissions too resulting in the
investigators relying more and more on the time-tested (one and half century-old) Indian Penal Code
even in technology based cases with the I.T. Act also being referred in the process and the reliance
more on IPC rather on the ITA.
3
Thus the need for an amendment – a detailed one – was felt for the I.T. Act almost from the year 2003-
04 itself. Major industry bodies were consulted and advisory groups were formed to go into the
perceived lacunae in the I.T. Act and comparing it with similar legislations in other nations and to
suggest recommendations. Such recommendations were analysed and subsequently taken up as a
comprehensive Amendment Act and after considerable administrative procedures, the consolidated
amendment called the Information Technology Amendment Act 2008 was placed in the Parliament and
passed without much debate, towards the end of 2008 (by which time the Mumbai terrorist attack of 26
November 2008 had taken place). This Amendment Act got the President assent on 5 Feb 2009 and
was made effective from 27 October 2009.
Some of the notable features of the ITAA are as follows:
 Focussing on data privacy
 Focussing on Information Security
 Defining cyber café
 Making digital signature technology neutral
 Defining reasonable security practices to be followed by corporate
 Redefining the role of intermediaries
 Recognising the role of Indian Computer Emergency Response Team
 Inclusion of some additional cyber crimes like child pornography and cyber terrorism
 authorizing an Inspector to investigate cyber offences (as against the DSP earlier)
In this chapter, we will be broadly discussing the various provisions of ITA 2000 and wherever the
same has been amended or a new section added as per the ITAA 2008, such remark will be made
appropriately.
How the Act is structured: The Act totally has 13 chapters and 90 sections (the last four sections
namely sections 91 to 94 in the ITA 2000 dealt with the amendments to the four Acts namely the Indian
Penal Code 1860, The Indian Evidence Act 1872, The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act 1891 and the
Reserve Bank of India Act 1934). The Act begins with preliminary and definitions and from thereon
the chapters that follow deal with authentication of electronic records, digital signatures, electronic
signatures etc.
Elaborate procedures for certifying authorities (for digital certificates as per IT Act -2000 and since
replaced by electronic signatures in the ITAA -2008) have been spelt out. The civil offence of data theft
and the process of adjudication and appellate procedures have been described. Then the Act goes on to
define and describe some of the well-known cyber crimes and lays down the punishments therefore.
Then the concept of due diligence, role of intermediaries and some miscellaneous provisions have been
described.
Rules and procedures mentioned in the Act have also been laid down in a phased manner, with the
latest one on the definition of private and sensitive personal data and the role of intermediaries, due
diligence etc., being defined as recently as April 2011. We will be discussing some of the important
provisions of such rules also in the later part of this chapter.
Applicability: The Act extends to the whole of India and except as otherwise provided, it applies to
also any offence or contravention there under committed outside India by any person. There are some
specific exclusions to the Act (ie where it is not applicable) as detailed in the First Schedule, stated
below:
4
a) negotiable instrument (Other than a cheque) as defined in section 13 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881;
b) a power-of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882;
c) a trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882
d) a will as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 including
any other testamentary disposition
e) any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property or any interest in such
property;
f) any such class of documents or transactions as may be notified by the Central
Government
Definitions: The ITA-2000 defines many important words used in common computer parlance like
‘access’, ‘computer resource’, ‘computer system’, ‘communication device’, ‘data’, ‘information’,
’security procedure’ etc. The definition of the word ‘computer’ itself assumes significance here.
‘Computer’ means any electronic magnetic, optical or other high-speed data processing device or
system which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions by manipulations of electronic,
magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software, or
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or
computer network;
So is the word ‘computer system’ which means a device or a collection of devices with input, output
and storage capabilities. Interestingly, the word ‘computer’ and ‘computer system’ have been so widely
defined to mean any electronic device with data processing capability, performing computer functions
like logical, arithmetic and memory functions with input, storage and output capabilities. A careful
reading of the words will make one understand that a high-end programmable gadgets like even a
washing machine or switches and routers used in a network can all be brought under the definition.
Similarly the word ‘communication devices’ inserted in the ITAA-2008 has been given an inclusive
definition, taking into its coverage cell phones, personal digital assistance or such other devices used to
transmit any text, video etc like what was later being marketed as iPad or other similar devices on Wi-fi
and cellular models. Definitions for some words like ‘cyber café’ were also later incorporated in the
ITAA 2008 when ‘Indian Computer response Emergency Team’ was included.
Digital Signature: ‘Electronic signature’ was defined in the ITAA -2008 whereas the earlier ITA -2000
covered in detail about digital signature, defining it and elaborating the procedure to obtain the digital
signature certificate and giving it legal validity. Digital signature was defined in the ITA -2000 as
“authentication of electronic record” as per procedure laid down in Section 3 and Section 3 discussed
the use of asymmetric crypto system and the use of Public Key Infrastructure and hash function etc.
This was later criticized to be technology dependent ie., relying on the specific technology of
asymmetric crypto system and the hash function generating a pair of public and private key
authentication etc.
Thus Section 3 which was originally “Digital Signature” was later renamed as “Digital Signature and
Electronic Signature” in ITAA - 2008 thus introducing technological neutrality by adoption of
electronic signatures as a legally valid mode of executing signatures. This includes digital signatures as
one of the modes of signatures and is far broader in ambit covering biometrics and other new forms of
creating electronic signatures not confining the recognition to digital signature process alone. While
M/s. TCS, M/s. Safescript and M/s. MTNL are some of the digital signature certifying authorities in
5
India, IDRBT (Institute for Development of Research in Banking Technology – the research wing of
RBI) is the Certifying Authorities (CA) for the Indian Banking and financial sector licensed by the
Controller of Certifying Authorities, Government of India.
It is relevant to understand the meaning of digital signature (or electronic signature) here. It would be
pertinent to note that electronic signature (or the earlier digital signature) as stipulated in the Act is
NOT a digitized signature or a scanned signature. In fact, in electronic signature (or digital signature)
there is no real signature by the person, in the conventional sense of the term. Electronic signature is
not the process of storing ones signature or scanning ones signature and sending it in an electronic
communication like email. It is a process of authentication of message using the procedure laid down
in Section 3 of the Act.
The other forms of authentication that are simpler to use such as biometric based retina scanning etc can
be quite useful in effective implementation of the Act. However, the Central Government has to evolve
detailed procedures and increase awareness on the use of such systems among the public by putting in
place the necessary tools and stipulating necessary conditions. Besides, duties of electronic signature
certificate issuing authorities for bio-metric based authentication mechanisms have to be evolved and
the necessary parameters have to be formulated to make it user-friendly and at the same time without
compromising security.
e-Governance: Chapter III discusses Electronic governance issues and procedures and the legal
recognition to electronic records is dealt with in detail in Section 4 followed by description of
procedures on electronic records, storage and maintenance and according recognition to the validity of
contracts formed through electronic means.
Procedures relating to electronic signatures and regulatory guidelines for certifying authorities have
been laid down in the sections that follow.
Chapter IX dealing with Penalties, Compensation and Adjudication is a major significant step in the
direction of combating data theft, claiming compensation, introduction of security practices etc
discussed in Section 43, and which deserve detailed description.
Section 43 deals with penalties and compensation for damage to computer, computer system etc.
This section is the first major and significant legislative step in India to combat the issue of data theft.
The IT industry has for long been clamouring for a legislation in India to address the crime of data theft,
just like physical theft or larceny of goods and commodities. This Section addresses the civil offence of
theft of data. If any person without permission of the owner or any other person who is in charge of a
computer, accesses or downloads, copies or extracts any data or introduces any computer contaminant
like virus or damages or disrupts any computer or denies access to a computer to an authorised user or
tampers etc…he shall be liable to pay damages to the person so affected. Earlier in the ITA -2000 the
maximum damages under this head was Rs.1 crore, which (the ceiling) was since removed in the ITAA
2008.
The essence of this Section is civil liability. Criminality in the offence of data theft is being separately
dealt with later under Sections 65 and 66. Writing a virus program or spreading a virus mail, a bot, a
Trojan or any other malware in a computer network or causing a Denial of Service Attack in a server
will all come under this Section and attract civil liability by way of compensation. Under this Section,
words like Computer Virus, Compute Contaminant, Computer database and Source Code are all
described and defined.
6
Questions like the employees’ liability in an organisation which is sued against for data theft or such
offences and the amount of responsibility of the employer or the owner and the concept of due diligence
were all debated in the first few years of ITA -2000 in court litigations like the bazee.com case and
other cases. Subsequently need was felt for defining the corporate liability for data protection and
information security at the corporate level was given a serious look.
Thus the new Section 43-A dealing with compensation for failure to protect data was introduced in the
ITAA -2008. This is another watershed in the area of data protection especially at the corporate level.
As per this Section, where a body corporate is negligent in implementing reasonable security practices
and thereby causes wrongful loss or gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay
damages by way of compensation to the person so affected. The Section further explains the phrase
‘body corporate’ and quite significantly the phrases ‘reasonable security practices and procedures’ and
‘sensitive personal data or information’.
Thus the corporate responsibility for data protection is greatly emphasized by inserting Section 43A
whereby corporates are under an obligation to ensure adoption of reasonable security practices. Further
what is sensitive personal data has since been clarified by the central government vide its Notification
dated 11 April 2011 giving the list of all such data which includes password, details of bank accounts or
card details, medical records etc. After this notification, the IT industry in the nation including techsavvy and widely technology-based banking and other sectors became suddenly aware of the
responsibility of data protection and a general awareness increased on what is data privacy and what is
the role of top management and the Information Security Department in organisations in ensuring data
protection, especially while handling the customers’ and other third party data.

 Reasonable Security Practices
 Site certification
 Security initiatives
 Awareness Training
 Conformance to Standards, certification
 Policies and adherence to policies
 Policies like password policy, Access
Control, email Policy etc
 Periodic monitoring and review.

The Information Technology (Reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data
or information) Rules have since been notified by the Government of India, Dept of I.T. on 11 April
2011. Any body corporate or a person on its behalf shall be considered to have complied with
reasonable security practices and procedures, if they have implemented such security practices and
standards and have a comprehensive documented information security programme and information
security policies containing managerial, technical, operational and physical security control measures
commensurate with the information assets being protected with the nature of business. In the event of
an information security breach, the body corporate or a person on its behalf shall be required to
demonstrate, as and when called upon to do so by the agency mandated under the law, that they have
implemented security control measures as per their documented information security programme and
7
information security policies. The international Standard IS/ISO/IEC 27001 on "Information
Technology – Security Techniques - Information Security Management System - Requirements" is one
such standard referred to in sub-rule (1).
In view of the foregoing, it has now become a major compliance issue on the part of not only IT
companies but also those in the Banking and Financial Sector especially those banks with huge
computerised operations dealing with public data and depending heavily on technology. In times of a
litigation or any security breach resulting in a claim of compensation of financial loss amount or
damages, it would be the huge responsibility on the part of those body corporate to prove that that said
“Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures” were actually in place and all the steps mentioned in
the Rules passed in April 2011 stated above, have been taken.
In the near future, this is one of the sections that is going to create much noise and be the subject of
much debates in the event of litigations, like in re-defining the role of an employee, the responsibility of
an employer or the top management in data protection and issues like the actual and vicarious
responsibility, the actual and contributory negligence of all stake holders involved etc.
The issue has wider ramifications especially in the case of a cloud computing scenario (the practice of
using a network of remote servers hosted on the Internet to store, manage, and process data, rather than
a local server, with the services managed by the provider sold on demand, for the amount of time used)
where more and more organisations handle the data of others and the information is stored elsewhere
and not in the owners’ system. Possibly, more debates will emanate on the question of information
owners vis a vis the information container and the information custodians and the Service Level
Agreements of all parties involved will assume a greater significance.
Adjudication: Having dealt with civil offences, the Act then goes on to describe civil remedy to such
offences in the form of adjudication without having to resort to the procedure of filing a complaint with
the police or other investigating agencies. Adjudication powers and procedures have been elaborately
laid down in Sections 46 and thereafter. The Central Government may appoint any officer not below
the rank of a director to the Government of India or a state Government as the adjudicator. The I.T.
Secretary in any state is normally the nominated Adjudicator for all civil offences arising out of data
thefts and resultant losses in the particular state. If at all one section can be criticized to be absolutely
lacking in popularity in the IT Act, it is this provision. In the first ten years of existence of the ITA,
there have been only a very few applications made in the nation, that too in the major metros almost all
of which are under different stages of judicial process and adjudications have been obtained in possibly
less than five cases. The first adjudication obtained under this provision was in Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
in a case involving ICICI Bank in which the bank was told to compensate the applicant with the
amount wrongfully debited in Internet Banking, along with cost and damages. in April 2010.
This section should be given much popularity and awareness should be spread among the public
especially the victims of cyber crimes and data theft that such a procedure does exist without recourse
to going to the police and filing a case. It is time the state spends some time and thought in enhancing
awareness on the provision of adjudication for civil offences in cyber litigations like data theft etc so
that the purpose for which such useful provisions have been made, are effectively utilized by the litigant
public.
There is an appellate procedure under this process and the composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal at
the national level, has also been described in the Act. Every adjudicating officer has the powers of a
8
civil court and the Cyber Appellate Tribunal has the powers vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure.
After discussing the procedures relating to appeals etc and the duties and powers of Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, the Act moves to the actual criminal acts coming under the broader definition of cyber crimes.
It would be pertinent to note that the Act only lists some of the cyber crimes, (without defining a cyber
crime) and stipulates the punishments for such offences. The criminal provisions of the IT Act and
those dealing with cognizable offences and criminal acts follow from Chapter IX titled “Offences”
Section 65: Tampering with source documents is dealt with under this section. Concealing, destroying,
altering any computer source code when the same is required to be kept or maintained by law is an
offence punishable with three years imprisonment or two lakh rupees or with both. Fabrication of an
electronic record or committing forgery by way of interpolations in CD produced as evidence in a court
(Bhim Sen Garg vs State of Rajasthan and others, 2006, Cri LJ, 3463, Raj 2411) attract punishment
under this Section. Computer source code under this Section refers to the listing of programmes,
computer commands, design and layout etc in any form.
Section 66: Computer related offences are dealt with under this Section. Data theft stated in Section
43 is referred to in this Section. Whereas it was a plain and simple civil offence with the remedy of
compensation and damages only, in that Section, here it is the same act but with a criminal intention
thus making it a criminal offence. The act of data theft or the offence stated in Section 43 if done
dishonestly or fraudulently becomes a punishable offence under this Section and attracts imprisonment
upto three years or a fine of five lakh rupees or both. Earlier hacking was defined in Sec 66 and it was
an offence.
Now after the amendment, data theft of Sec 43 is being referred to in Sec 66 by making this section
more purposeful and the word ‘hacking’ is not used. The word ‘hacking’ was earlier called a crime in
this Section and at the same time, courses on ‘ethical hacking’ were also taught academically. This led
to an anomalous situation of people asking how an illegal activity be taught academically with a word
‘ethical’ prefixed to it. Then can there be training programmes, for instance, on “Ethical burglary”,
“Ethical Assault” etc say for courses on physical defence? This tricky situation was put an end to, by
the ITAA when it re-phrased the Section 66 by mapping it with the civil liability of Section 43 and
removing the word ‘Hacking’. However the act of hacking is still certainly an offence as per this
Section, though some experts interpret ‘hacking’ as generally for good purposes (obviously to facilitate
naming of the courses as ethical hacking) and ‘cracking’ for illegal purposes. It would be relevant to
note that the technology involved in both is the same and the act is the same, whereas in ‘hacking’ the
owner’s consent is obtained or assumed and the latter act ‘cracking’ is perceived to be an offence.
Thanks to ITAA, Section 66 is now a widened one with a list of offences as follows:
66A Sending offensive messages thro communication service, causing annoyance etc through an
electronic communication or sending an email to mislead or deceive the recipient about the origin of
such messages (commonly known as IP or email spoofing) are all covered here. Punishment for these
acts is imprisonment upto three years or fine.
66B Dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device with punishment upto
three years or one lakh rupees as fine or both.
66C Electronic signature or other identity theft like using others’ password or electronic signature etc.
Punishment is three years imprisonment or fine of one lakh rupees or both.
9
66D Cheating by personation using computer resource or a communication device shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which extend to three years and shall also be liable to
fine which may extend to one lakh rupee.
66E Privacy violation – Publishing or transmitting private area of any person without his or her consent
etc. Punishment is three years imprisonment or two lakh rupees fine or both.
66F Cyber terrorism – Intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of the nation and
denying access to any person authorized to access the computer resource or attempting to penetrate or
access a computer resource without authorization. Acts of causing a computer contaminant (like virus
or Trojan Horse or other spyware or malware) likely to cause death or injuries to persons or damage to
or destruction of property etc. come under this Section. Punishment is life imprisonment.
It may be observed that all acts under S.66 are cognizable and non-bailable offences. Intention or the
knowledge to cause wrongful loss to others ie the existence of criminal intention and the evil mind ie
concept of mens rea, destruction, deletion, alteration or diminishing in value or utility of data are all
the major ingredients to bring any act under this Section.
To summarise, what was civil liability with entitlement for compensations and damages in Section 43,
has been referred to here, if committed with criminal intent, making it a criminal liability attracting
imprisonment and fine or both.
Section 67 deals with publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form. The earlier
Section in ITA was later widened as per ITAA 2008 in which child pornography and retention of
records by intermediaries were all included.
Publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form is dealt with here. Whoever publishes or
transmits any material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to
tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely to read the matter contained in it, shall be punished
with first conviction for a term upto three years and fine of five lakh rupees and in second conviction
for a term of five years and fine of ten lakh rupees or both.
This Section is of historical importance since the landmark judgement in what is considered to be the
first ever conviction under I.T. Act 2000 in India, was obtained in this Section in the famous case “State
of Tamil Nadu vs Suhas Katti” on 5 November 2004. The strength of the Section and the reliability of
electronic evidences were proved by the prosecution and conviction was brought about in this case,
involving sending obscene message in the name of a married women amounting to cyber stalking, email
spoofing and the criminal activity stated in this Section.
Section 67-A deals with publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act in
electronic form. Contents of Section 67 when combined with the material containing sexually explicit
material attract penalty under this Section.
Child Pornography has been exclusively dealt with under Section 67B. Depicting children engaged
in sexually explicit act, creating text or digital images or advertising or promoting such material
depicting children in obscene or indecent manner etc or facilitating abusing children online or inducing
children to online relationship with one or more children etc come under this Section. ‘Children’ means
persons who have not completed 18 years of age, for the purpose of this Section. Punishment for the
first conviction is imprisonment for a maximum of five years and fine of ten lakh rupees and in the
event of subsequent conviction with imprisonment of seven years and fine of ten lakh rupees.
10
Bonafide heritage material being printed or distributed for the purpose of education or literature etc are
specifically excluded from the coverage of this Section, to ensure that printing and distribution of
ancient epics or heritage material or pure academic books on education and medicine are not unduly
affected.
Screening videographs and photographs of illegal activities through Internet all come under this
category, making pornographic video or MMS clippings or distributing such clippings through mobile
or other forms of communication through the Internet fall under this category.
Section 67C fixes the responsibility to intermediaries that they shall preserve and retain such
information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner as the Central Government may
prescribe. Non-compliance is an offence with imprisonment upto three years or fine.
Transmission of electronic message and communication:
Section 69: This is an interesting section in the sense that it empowers the Government or agencies as
stipulated in the Section, to intercept, monitor or decrypt any information generated, transmitted,
received or stored in any computer resource, subject to compliance of procedure as laid down here.
This power can be exercised if the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, is
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the interest of sovereignty or integrity of India, defence of
India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing
incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for investigation of any
offence. In any such case too, the necessary procedure as may be prescribed, is to be followed and the
reasons for taking such action are to be recorded in writing, by order, directing any agency of the
appropriate Government. The subscriber or intermediary shall extend all facilities and technical
assistance when called upon to do so.
Section 69A inserted in the ITAA, vests with the Central Government or any of its officers
with the powers to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through
any computer resource, under the same circumstances as mentioned above. Section 69B
discusses the power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any
computer resource.
Commentary on the powers to intercept, monitor and block websites: In short, under the
conditions laid down in the Section, power to intercept, monitor or decrypt does exist. It would
be interesting to trace the history of telephone tapping in India and the legislative provisions
(or the lack of it?) in our nation and compare it with the powers mentioned here. Until the
passage of this Section in the ITAA, phone tapping was governed by Clause 5(2) of the Indian
Telegraph Act of 1885, which said that “On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the
interest of the public safety, the Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient
so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the
commission of an offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct that any
message or class of messages to or from any person or class of persons, or relating to any
particular subject, brought for transmission by or transmitted or received by any telegraph,
shall not be transmitted, or shall be intercepted or detained, or shall be disclosed to the
Government making the order or an officer thereof mentioned in the order”. Other sections of
the act mention that the government should formulate “precautions to be taken for preventing
the improper interception or disclosure of messages”. There have been many attempts, rather
many requests, to formulate rules to govern the operation of Clause 5(2). But ever since 1885,
11
no government has formulated any such precautions, maybe for obvious reasons to retain the
spying powers for almost a century.
 A writ petition was filed in the Supreme Court in 1991 by the People’s Union for Civil
Liberties, challenging the constitutional validity of this Clause 5(2). The petition argued that it
infringed the constitutional right to freedom of speech and expression and to life and personal
liberty. In December 1996, the Supreme Court delivered its judgment, pointing out that
“unless a public emergency has occurred or the interest of public safety demands, the
authorities have no jurisdiction to exercise the powers” given them under 5(2). They went on
to define them thus: a public emergency was the “prevailing of a sudden condition or state of
affairs affecting the people at large calling for immediate action”, and public safety “means the
state or condition of freedom from danger or risk for the people at large”. Without those two,
however “necessary or expedient”, it could not do so. Procedures for keeping such records and
the layer of authorities etc were also stipulated.
Now, this Section 69 of ITAA is far more intrusive and more powerful than the above-cited
provision of Indian Telegraph Act 1885. Under this ITAA Section, the nominated
Government official will be able to listen in to all phone calls, read the SMSs and emails, and
monitor the websites that one visited, subject to adherence to the prescribed procedures and
without a warrant from a magistrate’s order. In view of the foregoing, this Section was
critizised to be draconian vesting the government with much more powers than required.
Having said this, we should not be oblivious to the fact that this power (of intercepting,
monitoring and blocking) is something which the Government represented by the Indian
Computer Emergency Response Team, (the National Nodal Agency, as nominated in
Section 70B of ITAA) has very rarely exercised. Perhaps believing in the freedom of
expression and having confidence in the self-regulative nature of the industry, the CERT-In has
stated that these powers are very sparingly (and almost never) used by it.
Critical Information Infrastructure and Protected System have been discussed in Section 70.
The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) coming under the Ministry of
Information and Technology, Government of India, has been designated as the National Nodal
Agency for incident response. By virtue of this, CERT-In will perform activities like
collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents, forecasts and alerts of
cyber security incidents, emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents etc.
The role of CERT-In in e-publishing security vulnerabilities and security alerts is remarkable.
The Minister of State for Communications and IT Mr.Sachin Pilot said in a written reply to
the Rajya Sabha said that (as reported in the Press), CERT-In has handled over 13,000 such
incidents in 2011 compared to 8,266 incidents in 2009. CERT-In has observed that there is significant
increase in the number of cyber security incidents in the country. A total of 8,266, 10,315 and 13,301
security incidents were reported to and handled by CERT-In during 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively,"
 These security incidents include website intrusions, phishing, network probing, spread of malicious
code like virus, worms and spam, he added. Hence the role of CERT-In is very crucial and there are
much expectations from CERT In not just in giving out the alerts but in combating cyber crime, use the
weapon of monitoring the web-traffic, intercepting and blocking the site, whenever so required and with
due process of law.
Penalty for breach of confidentiality and privacy is discussed in Section 72 with the punishment being
imprisonment for a term upto two years or a fine of one lakh rupees or both.
12
Considering the global nature of cyber crime and understanding the real time scenario of fraudster
living in one part of the world and committing a data theft or DoS(Denial of Service)
 kind of an attack or other cyber crime in an entirely different part of the world, Section 75 clearly
states that the Act applies to offences or contravention committed outside India, if the contravention or
the offence involves a computer or a computer network located in India.
This Act has over-riding provisions especially with regard to the regulations stipulated in the Code of
Criminal Procedure. As per Section 78, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, a police officer not below the rank of an Inspector shall investigate an offence under this
Act. Such powers were conferred to officers not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police
earlier in the ITA which was later amended as Inspector in the ITAA.
Due Diligence: Liability of intermediaries and the concept of Due Diligence has been discussed in
Section 79. As per this, intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information hosted by him,
if his function is limited to providing access to a communication system over which information made
available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted or if he does not initiate the
transmission, select the receiver of the transmission and select or modify the information contained in
the transmission and if he observes due diligence and follows the guidelines prescribed by the Central
Government.
This concept of due diligence is also much being debated. Due Diligence was first discussed as an
immediate fallout of the famous bazee.com case in New Delhi, when the NRI CEO of the company was
arrested for making the MMS clipping with objectionable obscene material depicting school children
was made available in the public domain website owned by him, for sale (and later the CD was sold).
The larger issue being discussed at that time was how far is the content provider responsible and how
far the Internet Service Provider and what is due diligence which as the CEO of the company, he should
have exercised.
After passage of the ITAA and the introduction of ‘reasonable security practices and procedures’ and
the responsibility of body corporate as seen earlier in Section 43A, and to set at rest some confusion on
the significance of due diligence and what constitutes due diligence, the DIT came out with a set of
rules titled Information Technology (Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules on 11 April 2011. As per this,
“the intermediary, on whose computer system the information is stored or hosted or published, upon
obtaining knowledge by itself or been brought to actual knowledge by an affected person in writing or
through email signed with electronic signature about any such information as mentioned in sub-rule (2)
above, shall act within thirty six hours and where applicable, work with user or owner of such
information to disable such information that is in contravention of sub-rule (2). Further the intermediary
shall preserve such information and associated records for at least ninety days for investigation
purposes…..”
In essence, an intermediary shall be liable for any contravention of law committed by any user unless
the Intermediary can prove that he has exercised due diligence and has not conspired or abetted in the
act of criminality.
Power to enter, search etc has been described in Section 80. Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, any police officer, not below the rank of an Inspector or any other officer
….authorised ….may enter any public place and search and arrest without warrant any person found
therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being about to commit
13
any offence under this Act. This is another effective weapon that has been rarely and almost never
utilised by the police officers.
The Act is applicable to electronic cheques and truncated cheques (ie the image of cheque being
presented and processed curtailing and truncating the physical movement of the cheque from the
collecting banker to the paying banker).
Overriding powers of the Act and the powers of Central Government to make rules and that of State
Governments to make rules wherever necessary have been discussed in the Sections that follow.
Other Acts amended by the ITA:
The Indian Penal Code, 1860: Normally referred to as the IPC, this is a very powerful legislation and
probably the most widely used in criminal jurisprudence, serving as the main criminal code of India.
Enacted originally in 1860 and amended many time since, it covers almost all substantive aspects of
criminal law and is supplemented by other criminal provisions. In independent India, many special
laws have been enacted with criminal and penal provisions which are often referred to and relied upon,
as an additional legal provision in cases which refer to the relevant provisions of IPC as well.
ITA 2000 has amended the sections dealing with records and documents in the IPC by inserting the
word ‘electronic’ thereby treating the electronic records and documents on a par with physical records
and documents. The Sections dealing with false entry in a record or false document etc (eg 192, 204,
463, 464, 464, 468 to 470, 471, 474, 476 etc) have since been amended as electronic record and
electronic document thereby bringing within the ambit of IPC, all crimes to an electronic record and
electronic documents just like physical acts of forgery or falsification of physical records.
In practice, however, the investigating agencies file the cases quoting the relevant sections from IPC in
addition to those corresponding in ITA like offences under IPC 463,464, 468 and 469 read with the
ITA/ITAA Sections 43 and 66, to ensure the evidence or punishment stated at least in either of the
legislations can be brought about easily.
The Indian Evidence Act 1872: This is another legislation amended by the ITA. Prior to the passing
of ITA, all evidences in a court were in the physical form only. With the ITA giving recognition to all
electronic records and documents, it was but natural that the evidentiary legislation in the nation be
amended in tune with it. In the definitions part of the Act itself, the “all documents including electronic
records” were substituted. Words like ‘digital signature’, ‘electronic form’, ‘secure electronic record’
‘information’ as used in the ITA, were all inserted to make them part of the evidentiary mechanism in
legislations.
Admissibility of electronic records as evidence as enshrined in Section 65B of the Act assumes
significance. This is an elaborate section and a landmark piece of legislation in the area of evidences
produced from a computer or electronic device. Any information contained in an electronic record
which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media produced by a
computer shall be treated like a document, without further proof or production of the original, if the
conditions like these are satisfied: (a) the computer output containing the information was produced by
the computer during the period over which the computer was used regularly .... by lawful persons.. (b)
the information ...derived was regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said
activities; (c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was operating properly ......
and ......a certificate signed by a person .....responsible..... etc.
14
To put it in simple terms, evidences (information) taken from computers or electronic storage devices
and produced as print-outs or in electronic media are valid if they are taken from system handled
properly with no scope for manipulation of data and ensuring integrity of data produced directly with or
without human intervention etc and accompanied by a certificate signed by a responsible person
declaring as to the correctness of the records taken from a system a computer with all the precautions as
laid down in the Section.
However, this Section is often being misunderstood by one part of the industry to mean that computer
print-outs can be taken as evidences and are valid as proper records, even if they are not signed. We
find many computer generated letters emanating from big corporates with proper space below for
signature under the words “Your faithfully” or “truly” and the signature space left blank, with a Post
Script remark at the bottom “This is a computer generated letter and hence does not require signature”.
The Act does not anywhere say that ‘computer print-outs need not be signed and can be taken as
record’.
The Bankers’ Books Evidence(BBE) Act 1891 Amendment to this Act has been included as the third
schedule in ITA. Prior to the passing of ITA, any evidence from a bank to be produced in a court,
necessitated production of the original ledger or other register for verification at some stage with the
copy retained in the court records as exhibits. With the passing of the ITA the definitions part of the
BBE Act stood amended as: "’bankers
' books’ include ledgers, day-books, cash-books, account-books and all other books used in the
ordinary business of a bank whether kept in the written form or as printouts of data stored in a floppy,
disc, tape or any other form of electro-magnetic data storage device”. When the books consist of
printouts of data stored in a floppy, disc, tape etc, a printout of such entry ...certified in accordance with
the provisions ....to the effect that it is a printout of such entry or a copy of such printout by the
principal accountant or branch manager; and (b) a certificate by a person in-charge of computer system
containing a brief description of the computer system and the particulars of the safeguards adopted by
the system to ensure that data is entered or any other operation performed only by authorised persons;
the safeguards adopted to prevent and detect unauthorised change of data ...to retrieve data that is lost
due to systemic failure or .....
In short, just like in the Indian Evidence Act, the provisions in Bankers Books Evidence Act make the
printout from a computer system or a floppy or disc or a tape as a valid document and evidence,
provided, such print-out is accompanied by a certificate stating that it is a true extract from the official
records of the bank and that such entries or records are from a computerised system with proper
integrity of data, wherein data cannot be manipulated or accessed in an unauthorised manner or is not
lost or tamperable due to system failure or such other reasons.
Here again, let us reiterate that the law does not state that any computerised print-out even if not
signed, constitutes a valid record. But still even many banks of repute (both public sector and private
sector) often send out printed letters to customers with the space for signature at the bottom left blank
after the line “Yours faithfully” etc and with a remark as Post Script reading: “This is a computer
generated letter and hence does not require signature”. Such interpretation is grossly misleading and
sends a message to public that computer generated reports or letters need not be signed, which is never
mentioned anywhere in nor is the import of the ITA or the BBE.
The next Act that was amended by the ITA is the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. Section 58 of the
Act sub-section (2), after clause (p), a clause relating to the regulation of funds transfer through
15
electronic means between banks (ie transactions like RTGS and NEFT and other funds transfers) was
inserted, to facilitate such electronic funds transfer and ensure legal admissibility of documents and
records therein.
Observations on ITA and ITAA:
Having discussed in detail all the provisions of ITA and ITAA, let us now look at some of the broader
areas of omissions and commissions in the Act and the general criticism the Acts have faced over the
years.
Awareness: There is no serious provision for creating awareness and putting such initiatives in place in
the Act. The government or the investigating agencies like the Police department (whose job has been
made comparatively easier and focused, thanks to the passing of the IT Act), have taken any serious
step to create public awareness about the provisions in these legislations, which is absolutely essential
considering the fact that this is a new area and technology has to be learnt by all the stake-holders like
the judicial officers, legal professionals, litigant public and the public or users at large. Especially,
provisions like scope for adjudication process is never known to many including those in the
investigating agencies.
Jurisdiction: This is a major issue which is not satisfactorily addressed in the ITA or ITAA.
Jurisdiction has been mentioned in Sections 46, 48, 57 and 61 in the context of adjudication process and
the appellate procedure connected with and again in Section 80 and as part of the police officers’
powers to enter, search a public place for a cyber crime etc. In the context of electronic record, Section
13 (3) and (4) discuss the place of dispatch and receipt of electronic record which may be taken as
jurisprudence issues.
However some fundamental issues like if the mail of someone is hacked and the accused is a resident of
a city in some state coming to know of it in a different city, which police station does he go to? If he is
an employee of a Multi National Company with branches throughout the world and in many metros in
India and is often on tour in India and he suspects another individual say an employee of the same firm
in his branch or headquarters office and informs the police that evidence could lie in the suspect’s
computer system itself, where does he go to file he complaint. Often, the investigators do not accept
such complaints on the grounds of jurisdiction and there are occasions that the judicial officers too have
hesitated to deal with such cases. The knowledge that cyber crime is geography-agnostic, borderless,
territory-free and sans all jurisdiction and frontiers and happens in ‘cloud’ or the ‘space’, has to be
spread and proper training is to be given to all concerned players in the field.
Evidences: Evidences are a major concern in cyber crimes. Pat of evidences is the ‘crime scene’
issues. In cyber crime, there is no cyber crime. We cannot mark a place nor a computer nor a network,
nor seize the hard-disk immediately and keep it under lock and key keep it as an exhibit taken from the
crime scene.


16
Very often, nothing could be seen as a scene in cyber crime! The evidences, the data, the
network and the related gadgets along with of course the log files and trail of events emanating
or recorded in the system are actually the crime scene. While filing cases under IT Act, be it
as a civil case in the adjudication process or a criminal complaint filed with the police, many
often, evidences may lie in some system like the intermediaries’ computers or some times in
the opponent’s computer system too. In all such cases, unless the police swing into action
swiftly and seize the systems and capture the evidences, such vital evidences could be easily
destroyed. In fact, if one knows that his computer is going to be seized, he would immediately
go for destruction of evidences (formatting, removing the history, removing the cookies,
changing the registry and user login set ups, reconfiguring the system files etc) since most of
the computer history and log files are volatile in nature.
There is no major initiative in India on common repositories of electronic evidences by which
in the event of any dispute (including civil) the affected computer may be handed over to a
common trusted third party with proper software tools, who may keep a copy of the entire disk
and return the original to the owner, so that he can keep using it at will and the copy will be
produced as evidence whenever required. For this there are software tools like ‘EnCase’ wih a
global recognition and our own C-DAC tools which are available with much retrieval facilities,
search features without giving any room for further writing and preserving the original version
with date stamp for production as evidence.
Non coverage of many crimes: While there are many legislations in not only many Western
countries but also some smaller nations in the East, India has only one legislation -- the ITA
and ITAA. Hence it is quite natural that many issues on cyber crimes and many crimes per se
are left uncovered. Many cyber crimes like cyber squatting with an evil attention to extort
money. Spam mails, ISP’s liability in copyright infringement, data privacy issues have not
been given adequate coverage.
Besides, most of the Indian corporate including some Public Sector undertakings use
Operating Systems that are from the West especially the US and many software utilities and
hardware items and sometimes firmware are from abroad. In such cases, the actual reach and
import of IT Act Sections dealing with a utility software or a system software or an Operating
System upgrade or update used for downloading the software utility, is to be specifically
addressed, as otherwise a peculiar situation may come, when the user may not know whether
the upgrade or the patch is getting downloaded or any spyware getting installed. The Act does
not address the government’s policy on keeping the backup of corporates including the PSUs
and PSBs in our county or abroad and if kept abroad, the subjective legal jurisprudence on such
software backups.
We find, as has been said earlier in the chapter, that most of the cyber crimes in the nation are
still brought under the relevant sections of IPC read with the comparative sections of ITA or
the ITAA which gives a comfort factor to the investigating agencies that even if the ITA part of
the case is lost, the accused cannot escape from the IPC part.
17
To quote the noted cyber law expert in the nation and Supreme Court advocate Shri Pavan
Duggal, “While the lawmakers have to be complemented for their admirable work removing
various deficiencies in the Indian Cyberlaw and making it technologically neutral, yet it
appears that there has been a major mismatch between the expectation of the nation and the
resultant effect of the amended legislation. The most bizarre and startling aspect of the new
amendments is that these amendments seek to make the Indian cyberlaw a cyber crime friendly
legislation; - a legislation that goes extremely soft on cyber criminals, with a soft heart; a
legislation that chooses to encourage cyber criminals by lessening the quantum of punishment
accorded to them under the existing law; ….. a legislation which makes a majority of
cybercrimes stipulated under the IT Act as bailable offences; a legislation that is likely to pave
way for India to become the potential cyber crime capital of the world……”
Let us not be pessimistic that the existing legislation is cyber criminal friendly or paves the way to
increase crimes. Certainly, it does not. It is a commendable piece of legislation, a landmark first step
and a remarkable mile-stone in the technological growth of the nation. But let us not be complacent that
the existing law would suffice. Let us remember that the criminals always go faster than the
investigators and always try to be one step ahead in technology. After all, steganography was used in
the Parliament Attack case to convey a one-line hidden message from one criminal to another which
was a lesson for the investigators to know more about the technology of steganography. Similarly
Satellite phones were used in the Mumbai attack case in November 2008 after which the investigators
became aware of the technological perils of such gadgets, since until then, they were relying on cell
phones and the directional tracking by the cell phone towers and Call Details Register entries only.
Hopefully, more and more awareness campaign will take place and the government will be conscious of
the path ahead to bring more and more legislations in place. Actually, bringing more legislations may
just not be sufficient, because the conviction rate in Cyber crime offences is among the lowest in the
nation, much lower than the rate in IPC and other offences. The government should be aware that it is
not the severity of punishment that is a deterrent for the criminals, but it is the certainty of punishment.
It is not the number of legislations in a society that should prevent crimes but it is the certainty of
punishment that the legislation will bring.
Let us now discuss some of the other relevant legislations in the nation that deal with cyber crimes in
various sectors.
Prevention of Money Laundering Act:
Black money has always been a serious evil in any developing economy. Nation builders, lawmakers
and particularly the country’s financial administrators have always taken persistent efforts to curb the
evil of black money and all sorts of illegally earned income. A major initiative taken in this direction in
India is the Anti Money Laundering Act 2002. A main objective of the Act was to provide for
confiscation of property derived from, or involved in, money laundering.
Money laundering though not defined in the Act, can be construed to mean directly or indirectly
attempting to indulge in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime and projecting it
as untainted property. The Act stipulates that whoever commits the offence of money laundering shall
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but may
extend to seven years and also be liable to a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
Money laundering involves a process of getting the money from illegal sources, layering it in any legal
source, integrating it as part of any legal system like banking and actually using it. Since the banking as
18
an industry has a major and significant role to play in the act of money laundering, it is now a serious
responsibility on the part of banks to ensure that banking channel is not used in the criminal activity.
Much more than a responsibility, it is now a compliance issue as well.
Obligations of banks include maintenance of records of all transactions of the nature and value
specified in the rules, furnish information of the transactions within the prescribed time, whenever
warranted and verify and maintain records of the identity of all customers. Hence, as a corollary,
adherence to Know Your Customer norms and maintenance of all KYC records assumes a very major
significance and becomes a compliance issue. Records of cash transactions and suspicious transactions
are to be kept and reported as stipulated. Non compliance on any of these will render the concerned
bank official liable for the offence of money laundering and guilty under the Act.
e-Records Maintenance Policy of Banks:
Computerisation started in most of the banks in India from end 80’s in a small way in the form of standalone systems called Advanced Ledger Posting Machines (Separate PC for every counter/activity)
which then led to the era of Total Branch Automation or Computerisation in early or mid 90’s. TBA or
TBC as it was popularly called, marked the beginning of a networked environment on a Local Area
Network under a client-server architecture when records used to be maintained in electronic manner in
hard-disks and external media like tapes etc for backup purposes.
Ever since passing of the ITA and according of recognition to electronic records, it has become
mandatory on the part of banks to maintain proper computerized system for electronic records.
Conventionally, all legacy systems in the banks always do have a record maintenance policy often with
RBI’s and their individual Board approval stipulating the period of preservation for all sorts of records,
ledgers, vouchers, register, letters, documents etc.
Thanks to computerisation and introduction of computerized data maintenance and often computergenerated vouchers also, most of the banks became responsive to the computerized environment and
quite a few have started the process of formulating their own Electronic Records Maintenance Policy.
Indian Banks’ Association took the initiative in bringing out a book on Banks’ e-Records Maintenance
Policy to serve as a model for use and adoption in banks suiting the individual bank’s technological setup. Hence banks should ensure that e-records maintenance policy with details of e-records, their nature,
their upkeep, the technological requirements, off-site backup, retrieval systems, access control and
access privileges initiatives should be in place, if not already done already.
On the legal compliance side especially after the Rules were passed in April 2011, on the “Reasonable
Security Practices and Procedures” as part of ITAA 2008 Section 43A, banks should strive well to
prove that they have all the security policies in place like compliance with ISO 27001 standards etc and
e-records are maintained. Besides, the certificate to be given as an annexure to e-evidences as
stipulated in the BBE Act also emphasizes this point of maintenance of e-records in a proper ensuring
proper backup, ensuring against tamperability, always ensuring confidentiality, integrity, availability
and Non Repudiation.
This policy should not be confused with the Information Technology Business Continuity and Disaster
Recovery Plan or Policy nor the Data Warehousing initiatives. Focus on all these three policies (BCDRP, DWH and E-records Maintenance Policy) are individually different, serving different purposes,
using different technologies and maybe coming under different administrative controls too at the
managerial level.
19
Legislations in other nations:
As against the lone legislation ITA and ITAA in India, in many other nations globally, there are many
legislations governing e-commerce and cyber crimes going into all the facets of cyber crimes. Data
Communication, storage, child pornography, electronic records and data privacy have all been
addressed in separate Acts and Rules giving thrust in the particular area focused in the Act.
In the US, they have the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act popularly known
as HIPAA which inter alia, regulates all health and insurance related records, their upkeep and
maintenance and the issues of privacy and confidentiality involved in such records.
Companies dealing with US firms ensure HIPAA compliance insofar as the data relating to
such corporate are handled by them. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) signed into law in 2002
and named after its authors Senator Paul Sarbanes and Representative Paul Oxley, mandated a
number of reforms to enhance corporate responsibility, enhance financial disclosures, and
combat corporate and accounting fraud. Besides, there are a number of laws in the US both at
the federal level and at different states level like the Cable Communications Policy Act,
Children’s Internet Protection Act, Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act etc.
In the UK, the Data Protection Act and the Privacy and Electronic Communications
Regulations etc are all regulatory legislations already existing in the area of information
security and cyber crime prevention, besides cyber crime law passed recently in August 2011.
Similarly, we have cyber crime legislations and other rules and regulations in other nations.
Conclusion: To sum up, though a crime-free society is Utopian and exists only in dreamland, it should be constant endeavour of rules to keep the crimes lowest. Especially in a
society that is dependent more and more on technology, crime based on electronic offences are
bound to increase and the law makers have to go the extra mile compared to the fraudsters, to
keep them at bay. Technology is always a double-edged sword and can be used for both the
purposes – good or bad. Steganography, Trojan Horse, Scavenging (and even DoS or DDoS)
are all technologies and per se not crimes, but falling into the wrong hands with a criminal
intent who are out to capitalize them or misuse them, they come into the gamut of cyber crime
and become punishable offences. Hence, it should be the persistent efforts of rulers and law
makers to ensure that technology grows in a healthy manner and is used for legal and ethical
business growth and not for committing crimes.

 It should be the duty of the three stake holders viz i) the rulers, regulators, law makers and
investigators ii) Internet or Network Service Providers or banks and other intermediaries and
20
iii) the users to take care of information security playing their respective role within the
permitted parameters and ensuring compliance with the law of the land.
*******.******
Source: Book on “IT” Security of IIBF Published by M/s TaxMann Publishers
 *****************
 1
1THE KARNATAKA CIVIL RULES OF PRACTICE, 1967
NOTIFICATION
No. SPL. 1 of 1962, dated Ist June 1967
(KARNATAKA GAZETTE, dated 20.07.1967, Part-IV 2-D)
 (As amended by Notification Nos. ROC 2062/68, dated 1.5.1969 (KGD
8.5.1969); ROC 1058/68, dated 15.5.1969 (KGD 22.5.1969); ROC 3297/A/68,
dated 15.7.1969 (KGD 24.7.1969); ROC 3466/68, dated 12/13.8.1969 (KGD
21.8.1969); ROC 3346/68, dated 4.12.1969 (KGD 18.12.1969); ROC 641/A/69,
dated 4.12.1969 (KGD 18.12.1969); ROC 943/69, dated 4.12.1969 (KGD
18.12.1969); ROC 1318/1969, dated 21.2.1970 (KGD 5.3.1970); ROC 2648/1969,
dated 12/15.6.1970 (KGD 25.6.1970); RPS 16/1983(1), dated 10.4.1984 (KGD
3.5.1984); LCA I/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984 (KGD 22.11.1984); RPS 134/1980,
dated 22.3.1986 (KGD 3.4.1986); LCA IV-417/1980, dated 16.6.1986 (KGD
26.6.1986); LCA I/571/85, dated 28.2.1991 (KGD 7.3.1991); LCA I/49/92, dated
6.1.1993 (KGD 28.1.1993); LCA I/107/1986, dated 22.2.1993 (KGD 4.3.1993); LCA
I/187/86, dated 2.3.1993 (KGD 18.3.1993); LCA I 313/91(2), dated 12.4.1993
(KGD 13.5.1993); LCA-I 471/92, dated 17.11.1993 (KGD 2.12.1993); LCA
571/85/OC/92, dated 16.12.1993 (KGD 6.1.1994); LCA I 471/92, dated 15.1.1994
(KGD 20.1.1994); LCA I 536/92, dated 6.1.1999 (KGD 28.1.1999); and LCA-I/108/
1995, dated 19.4.2000 (KGD 15.6.2000) ; LCA/I/633/95 HCLC, dated 23/4/2001
(KGD dated 6-9-01); HCLC/5/2000 dated 24/8/2001 ; LCA/I/51/90/HCLC, dated
11/3/2003 ; LAW/135/LAC/2003 dated 30/7/2003 and LAW/08/LAC/2005,
dated 06/04/2006.)
 In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 122 of the Code of Civil
Procedure (Central Act V of 1908) and all other powers thereunto enabling, the
High Court of Karnataka, with the previous approval of the Government of
Karnataka, and in suppression of the Rules of Practice continuing in force by virtue
of Section 119 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Central Act XXXVII of 1956)
in different areas of the State, hereby makes the following Rules of Practice to have
effect throughout the territories of the State with respect to the Practice and
Procedure of the Civil Courts subject to the superintendence of the High Court of
Karnataka, the same having been previously published for objections and
suggestions in the Karnataka Gazette, dated 23rd May, 1963.-
1. Published in the Karnataka Gazette, dated 20-07.1967 vide No. SPL. 1 of 1962, dated 1-6-1967
2
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 1. (1) These Rules may be called the Karnataka Civil Rules of Practice, 1967.
 (2) These Rules shall come into force from such *[date] as may be notified
in the Karnataka Gazette by the High Court.
*NOTIFICATION
Notification No. SPL 1 of 1962 dated 5-10-1967
[Published in the Karnataka Gazette, dated 12-10-1967)
In exercise of powers conferred by sub-rule (2) of Rule 1 of the
Karnataka Civil Rules of Practice, 1967, the High Court of Karnataka
notifies the 1st day of November, 1967, as the date from which the
Karnataka Civil Rules of Practice, 1967, shall come into force.

2. The reference to Forms in these Rules shall be to the Forms mentioned in
Appendix A hereto and the reference to Registers shall be to the Registers
mentioned in Appendix B, unless specified otherwise.
 3. (1) In, these Rules the word "Code" means the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, as amended from time to time.
 (2) "Pleadings" shall include plaints, written statements, memoranda of
appeals, cross-objections, original petitions, applications, counter statements,
replies, rejoinders and every statement setting out the case of a party in the matter
to which the pleadings relate.
1[(3) "First Hearing", in relation to a suit means the date on which the
defendant is summoned to appear for settlement of issues or for final hearing and
includes any other adjourned date for the above purpose.
 (4) "Legal Aid Board" means the Board constituted under the Karnataka
Legal Aid Board Act, 1981 (Karnataka Act 32 of 1981).
 (5) "Chief Ministerial Officer" includes the Registrars and Deputy Registrar
of the Bangalore City Civil Court and the Court of Small Causes, Bangalore.
 (6) "Judge" or "Presiding Officer" means and includes the Principal City
Civil Judge, Additional City Civil Judge, Chief Judge of the Court of Small Causes,
Judge of the Court of Small Causes, District Judge, Additional District Judge, Civil
Judge, Additional Civil Judge, Munsiff or Additional Munsiff appointed under the
Bangalore City Civil Courts Act, 1979, the Karnataka Civil Courts Act, 1964, or the
Karnataka Small Causes Courts Act, 1964.]
1. Sub-Rules (3) to (6) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
3
 4. On the coming into force of these Rules all existing Rules, Orders,
Circulars, Practice, Convention or the like governing any matter dealt with or
covered by these rules shall stand repealed:
 Provided that this repeal shall not affect or invalidate any action, decision or
proceeding taken, any disposal made, any decree or order made or issued under
the existing rules before the commencement of these Rules.
5. Description of the Proceedings.- (1) A suit instituted in any Court
subordinate to the High Court, other than a suit cognizable by a Court of Small
Causes, shall be designated an 'Original Suit' and indicated by the abbreviation
"O.S.".
 (2) A suit cognizable by a Court of Small Causes shall be designated a 'Small
Cause Suit' and indicated by the abbreviation "S.C.".
 (3) All proceedings in execution of decrees or orders shall be designated
'Execution Cases' and denoted by the abbreviation "Ex.C."
 (4) Original proceedings other than Suits and Execution Cases shall be
classified according to the nature of the subject matter and be designated as
mentioned below and indicated by the abbreviation noted against each category:
 (a) Land Acquisition Cases - L.A.C.
 (b) Matrimonial Cases - M.C.
 (c) Guardians and Wards Cases - G. and W.C.
 (d) Probate and Succession Cases - P. and S.C.
 (e) Insolvency Cases I.C.
 (f) Arbitration Cases - A.C.
1[(ff) Arbitration Suits - A.S]
1. Clause (ff) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
 (g) House Rent Control Cases - H.R.C.
2[(gg) Accident Claim Cases under the Motor Vehicles Act - MVC.
 (ggg) Company matter,-
 (a) Company Petitions - COP.
 (b) Company applications - COA.]
2. Clause (gg) and (ggg) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
 (h) Miscellaneous Cases (i.e. cases not falling under any of the above
categories)- Mis.C.

4
 (5) Appeals shall be classified as follows:-
 (a) Regular Appeals, that is, appeals against decrees in Original
Suits - indicated by the abbreviation "R.A.";
 (b) Execution Appeals, that is, appeals against original orders
determining questions under Section 47 of the Code deemed to be
decrees-indicated by the abbreviation "Ex.A.";
 (c) Miscellaneous Appeals, that is, appeals against any other judgments
or orders including any order as to costs only, made by a subordinate
Civil Court in the exercise of its civil jurisdiction-indicated by the
abbreviation "M.A.";
 (d) House Rent Control Appeals - "H.R.C.A.";
1[(e) Education Appellate Tribunal Cases. E.A.T]
1. Clause (e) inserted by Notification No. LCA 1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
2[(6) Revision petitions under any special enactment shall be designated as
'Revision Petitions' with a brief reference within brackets as to the
nature of the case and indicated by the abbreviation 'REV'
(Eg. Revision Petition under Rent Control Act to be designated as REV
with the abbreviation (RENT).]2
2. Sub-Rule (6) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
6. Description of parties.- 3[(1)] The contending and opposing parties shall
be described as Plaintiff and Defendant respectively in Suits Appellant and
Respondent in Appeals, Decree-holder and Judgment-debtor in Execution Cases
and Petitioner and Opponent in all other proceedings.]3
4[(2) The proceedings before appellate and revisional courts, the ranks held
by the respective parties in the lower courts, shall be indicated within brackets in
the cause title.]4
3. Original Rule 6 renumbered as sub-Rule (1) by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984,
w.e.f. 22-11-1984
4. Sub-Rule (2) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f 22-11-1984
5
CHAPTER II
PLEADINGS
(Read with Orders VI, VII and VIII of the Code)
 7. (1) All pleadings, affidavits, memoranda or lists of documents and copies
of documents presented to or filed in any Court shall be fairly and legibly written,
typed or printed on durable white paper i1[or azure laid paper of metric A-4 size
(30.5 cms. long and 21.5 cms. wide), weighing not less than 4.9 Kilograms a ream
in the case of pleadings and not less than 3.9 Kilograms a ream in the case of other
documents with an outer margin 6.5 Cms., wide and an inner margin 2.5 Cms.
wide] separate sheets being stitched together bookwise and pages numbered
serially.
1. Substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f 22-11-1984.
 (2) Every pleading shall be headed by a cause title disclosing the Court and
the proceeding in which it is filed.
2[(3) Every Judge returning a plaint under Rule 10 or 10A of Order VII of the
Code shall cause to be endorsed there on in red ink, under his initials and seal,
particulars such as, (a)* the date of presentation of the plaint, (b) by whom
presented, (c) the date of appearance, if any, of the defendants, (d) the date of
decision for returning the Plaint, (e) a brief statement of reasons for ordering the
return, (f) the name of the Court, if any, to which the plaintiff proposes to present
the plaint after its return, by specifying such intention under sub-rule 2 (a) of Rule
10-A of Order VII, (g) whether the court has given notice to the parties to appear
before such Court and if so, set for such appearance.
 (4) The outer margins shall be used only for endorsements, of the Court and
for amendments, if any, carried out with the leave of the Court. However, where
any amendment cannot be incorporated in the outer margin, the same may be
incorporated in a separate sheet and a note shall be made in the outer margin to
the effect that a separate sheet incorporating the amendment is annexed. All
amendments may be shown in red ink.
 (5) The Court Fee labels shall be so affixed as to ensure, that when they are
cancelled or punched, the contents of the documents are not obliterated.
 (6) Every paper or set of papers presented shall be enclosed by an accurate
list thereof prepared in triplicate in the following form, namely,-
 2. Sub-Rules (3) to (7) inserted by Notification No.LAC-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.22.11.1984.
6
 In the Court of ..............................................................................................
.............................................................................. dated .......................................
Case No.
 List of documents produced by Plaintiff/Appellant/Petitioner/
Defendant/Respondent/Opponent.
No. Description
of
documents
Whether
original
or copy
No. of pages
of the
document
Date, if any,
which,
document
bears
Value of
stamps
affixed on
document
Remarks

Place:
Date: Signature of Party/Pleader
Acknowledgement of receiving clerk 'Checked and Received'.
(7) (a) It shall be the duty of the Receiving Officer to initial with date, check
the papers with reference to the index sheet and also to comply with the
requirements of Rule 12 relating to documents produced with
pleadings, and to issue an acknowledgement on the presentation form.
 (b) Save in cases covered by Rule 3 of Order XXXIII or Rule 1 of Order
XXIX of the Code, pleadings or other papers in Judicial matters shall be
presented by the party in person or by his recognised agent or by his
pleader or by a duly registered clerk of the Pleader to the Chief
Ministerial Officer of the Court or such other officer as may be
designated for the purpose by the Presiding Officer of the Court.]
(Read with Order VII, Rule 1 of the Code)
8. Dating of Pleadings.- Every pleading or other paper filed in a Court shall
bear the date on which the signature of the party is affixed, the date of presenting it
to Court and the date of its receipt in Court. When copies of such pleadings or
papers are granted such dates shall also be copied by the copyist.
9. Presentation.- (1) No pleading or any other paper in a judicial matter
shall be received, unless it is presented by the party in person or by his recognised
agent or by his pleader or by a duly registered clerk of the pleader. Such
presentation shall be made to the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court or such
other officer as may be designated for the purpose by the Presiding Officer of the
Court.
7
 (2) No pleading shall be received unless it is accompanied by sufficient
number of copies to be served on the opposite side, 1[and where the State
Government or an officer of the State Government is a party an additional copy on
the Government Pleader attached to the court] except where the copies are already
furnished to the opponent or opponent's pleader and acknowledgment therefor is
produced. 2[Where the State Government or an Officer of the State Government is a
party to the proceedings the Government Pleader attached to the Court shall be
entitled to an additional copy of the pleadings.]
1. Inserted by Notification No. RPS 16 of 1983 (1), dated 10-4-1984 w.e.f. 3-5-1984
2. Inserted by Notification No. RPS 16 of 1983 (1), dated 10-4-1984 w.e.f. 3-5-1984
 (3) The officer to whom such papers are presented shall endorse on the same
in red ink the name of the person presenting the paper and the value of the stamp
affixed, initial the same and note the date of presentation.
3[(4) No pleading or other paper shall be received after 4 p.m. on working
days by the Chief Ministerial Officer, or other officer designated in this behalf.
However, where questions of limitation are involved, or in matters of great urgency,
where the party or his pleader, with due diligence could not present the pleading
before 4 p.m. such pleading may be presented thereafter before the Presiding
Officer himself, if available. The Presiding Officer, save in cases involving limitation,
may, in his discretion, refuse to receive the plaint or paper, and by an
endorsement, direct that the same be presented during the working hours of the
Court on the next working day. However, if he decides to receive the same he shall
endorse the time and date of receipt, and if feasible, obtain below the endorsement,
the signature of the person presenting the pleading and pass such orders as may
be found practicable. To remove doubts, it is hereby clarified that all pleadings so
received at or before mid-night shall be deemed to have been received on the
corresponding date of the calendar.
3. Sub-Rules (4) to (7) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
 (5) All pleadings and other papers presented shall be entered in a register,
containing the following columns, by the Chief Administrative Officer, or any official
authorised in this behalf.
Sl.
No.
Presentation Signature of Remarks
Date Time by whom Receiving
Officer
Case worker
to whom
referred

8
 (6) The Register shall be available for inspection by the pleaders or their
clerks during the working hours of the Court.
 (7) All pleadings/papers received shall be dealt with by the case worker, in
the chronological order of receipt as endorsed on them, unless, a motion is made
for consideration out of turn and the Presiding Officer grants such request.]
 1[9-A (1) Every Vakalatnama submitted to the Court by the Advocate shall
contain the Roll No. and address either in a printed form or affixed by a rubber
stamp or written by hand.
 (2) The Vakalatnama shall contain clearly the details as to the acceptance of
the Vakalatnama by the advocate and his signature for having accepted the
Vakalat.
 (3) The details of Registration No. Address and also acceptance so furnished
shall be recorded by the office in the Computer or shall be entered in the relevant
register.
Provided that where Vakalatnama is being filed by more than one Advocate,
it is sufficient if the address of the senior most among them is furnished.]
1. Rule-9A inserted by Notification No. HCLC-5/2000, dated 24-8-2001, w.e.f. 7-2-2002
 10. Provision of Law.- Every pleading shall specify the provision or
provisions of law under which the same is presented. Further, in the case of
appeals under Rule 1 of Order XLIII of the Code, the particulars or relevant clause
shall also be specified.
11. Proceedings in respect of immovable property.- 2[(1)] In proceedings
in respect of immovable property every plaint and original petition, in which relief is
sought with respect to immovable property shall contain a description of the
property in such detail as to clearly identify the property. In cases where the value
of the property is required to be estimated for the purpose of the Karnataka Court
Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958, there shall be annexed thereto a statement,
duly filled in and signed by the party, of the particulars mentioned in Form No.1.
3[(2) Whenever the plaint or written statement or a petition refers to tangible
movable or immovable property, the descriptive details thereof shall be appended in
the form of a schedule, annexed to the pleadings and it shall be thereafter sufficient
to refer to such property as the 'plaint schedule property' or 'written statement
schedule property', or the 'petition schedule property' as the case may be. If the
properties include both movables and immovables, separate schedules may be
given and the schedules be numbered serially as A, B, C, D, etc. All items of
immovable properties shall be arranged in the ascending order of survey numbers
or house numbers, village-wise.]3
2. Original Rule 11 renumbered as sub-Rule (1) by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984,
w.e.f. 22-11-1984
3. Sub-Rule (2) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
9
 (Read with Order VII, Rule 3 of the Code)
 12. 1[(1)] When a document produced with any pleading appears to be
defaced, torn, or in any way damaged, or where its condition or appearance
requires special notice, a note of its condition and appearance should be made on
the list of documents by the party producing the same and should be checked and
initialled, if correct, by the Officer receiving the same.
1. Original Rule 12 renumbered as sub-rule (1) by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated: 27/10/1984, w.e.f.
22/11/1984
2[(2) Any pleader or party presenting an un-registered document in original,
may of his own accord produce photostat/xerox copy of the same for facility of easy
handling. In any other case the court may direct the party producing the document
to produce one or more Photostat/Xerox copies of the same and in such an event,
the cost shall abide the result.]1
2. Sub Rule (2) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated: 27/10/1984, w.e.f. 22/11/1984
13. Delay.- All appeals or applications to which Section 5 of the Limitation
Act applies, presented after the expiry of the time prescribed by law, must contain a
statement of the period of delay. They must be accompanied by an application for
condonation of the delay supported by an affidavit.
(Read with Order VII, Rule 6 of the Code
and Section 5 of the Limitation Act)
3[14. (1) On presentation of every plaint or original petition the same shall be
entered in Register No. VIII and examined by the Chief Ministerial Officer of the
Court, with reference to a check slip containing the following particulars:-
"CHECK SLIP"
 (i) Nature of the suit or Proceedings.
 (ii) Whether the plaint or petition comes within the pecuniary and
territorial jurisdiction of the Court?
 (iii) Whether the cause of action or any part of it arises within the
jurisdiction of the Court?
 (iv) Whether the valuation for purposes of Court Fee and Jurisdiction is
correct? If not, what is the office objection?
 (v) Prima facie, is there any bar of limitation?
 (vi) Prima facie, is there any bar of limitation? law?
(vii) The number of Interlocutory applications accompanying the
plaint/petition and the provisions invoked in aid of the same?
3. Rule 14(1) substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated: 27/10/1984, w.e.f. 22/11/1984
10
 (viii) Number of documents enclosed and their condition or state?
 (ix) Whether the copies of suit documents, duly compared have been
produced?
 (x) Whether copies of the pleading, in sufficient number, for service on the
opposite side, accompanied by necessary process fee and duly
addressed envelopes, with postage and acknowledgement forms, have
been produced?
 (xi) Does the Party or Advocate, presenting the papers, desire the case to be
immediately called in Court for urgent interlocutory order?
 (xii) Has any caveat been filed in respect of the same matter by any one?
 (xiii) Are all certified copies and other documents sufficiently stamped?
 (xiv) Is leave/special leave of the Court sought for any particular purposes?
 (xv) Is there any other bar for registration of the suit or petition?
 (xvi) Signature of the Checking Officer?
 (xvii) Orders of the Presiding Officer or the Chief Ministerial Officer relating to
admission of the plaint (or petition) or granting time for rectification of
office objection.]
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1) any non-compliance with these
Rules or any clerical mistake may be required by the Chief Ministerial Officer to be
rectified within such time as may be specified by him. Any rectification so effected,
shall be initialled and dated by the party making the same and the Chief Ministerial
Officer shall note the number of corrections in the margin, in red ink, and shall
initial and date the same.
 In the event of such rectification not being made within such time, the Chief
Ministerial Officer shall place the matter before the Presiding Officer of the Court
for orders.
 (3) This Rule shall apply mutatis mutandis to Memoranda of Appeals.
(Read with Orders IV and VII of the Code)
Note.- All rectifications must be made only in the presence of the Chief
Ministerial Officer.
15. Addition and substitution of parties.- Whenever the Court orders that
a party be added, substituted, or deleted, the cause title as well as the body of the
plaint or memorandum of appeal shall accordingly be amended before the
adjourned date of hearing. Such amendment shall be made in red ink.
11
(Read with Order I of the Code)
16. Party appearing by Agent.- (1) When a party appears by an agent, other
than a pleader, the agent shall, before making or doing any appearance, application
or act, in or to the Court, file in Court the power-of-attorney, (or a properly
authenticated copy thereof) authorising him to do so.
 (2) Any person claiming to be a recognised agent under Rule 2(b) of Order III
of the Code, shall file an affidavit stating the residence of his principal, the trade or
business carried on by the agent on his behalf and the connection of the same with
the subject matter of the suit, and that no other agent is expressly authorised to
make any such appearance or application or do such act.
12
(Read with Order III of the Code)
1[CHAPTER II-A
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE
(Section 92 of the Code)
(16-A).(1) An application, seeking leave of the Court to file a suit under
Section 92 of the Code, shall be made by two or more persons having an interest in
the trust.
 (2) Such an application shall be accompanied by a copy of the plaint
proposed to be filed.
 (3) Such an application shall be treated as an independent and substantive
application and be designated as miscellaneous petition.
 (4) An application seeking leave to file a suit under Section 92 of the Code,
shall, be disposed of by the Principal Judge or in his absence the senior most
Judge of the Court after giving an opportunity of hearing to the applicants:
 Provided that if the Court considers necessary to hear the opposite party
also, the Court may order issue of notice to the opposite party and pass orders on
the application after giving an opportunity of hearing to both the parties.
 (5) When the leave is granted by the Court as sought for, the suit shall be
deemed to have been instituted on the date of filing of Miscellaneous petition,
provided persons who have obtained leave, pay the requisite Court Fee on the
plaint within the time granted by the Court.]
1. Chapter II-A (Rule16-A) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1 187/86, dated: 2/3/1993, w.e.f. 18/3/1993
2[CHAPTER II-B
“CAVEAT PETITIONS”
(16-B) Caveat petition filed under Section 148-A of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 shall be entered in a register in the form given hereunder.-
"Caveat Register"
 1. Number of Caveat
 2. Date of Lodging
 3. Caveater's Name and Address
 4. Name and address of the plaintiff/applicant in suit or proceedings.
 5. Date of filing application in a suit or proceeding in respect of which
Caveat is filed.
 6. Suit or proceedings number if any (with reference to application) in
 which the application is filed.
 7. Date of destruction of the Caveat Petition.
 8. Remarks
1. Chapter II-B (Rule 16-B & 16-C) inserted by Notification No.LCA-1/471/1992, dated 17-11-1993
w.e.f. 2/12/1993.
13
16-C. (1) When the application in a suit or proceeding to which the caveat
pertains is or has been filed, the caveat shall be kept in the records of that suit or
proceeding and corresponding entry in the Caveat Register shall be rounded off and
the caveat shall stand disposed off.
 (2) In any case to which the above rule does not apply, when a caveat ceases
to be in force in accordance with Section 148-A(5) the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, the same shall be destroyed, after a lapse of one year from the date on which
it has ceased to be in force. The date of destruction of the caveat shall be entered in
the Caveat Register.]
14
CHAPTER III
INTERLOCUTORY MATTERS
1[17. 'Interlocutory application' means an application to the Court in any
Suit, Appeal or Proceeding already instituted in such Court other than an
application for execution of the decree or setting aside the decree or final order
made in such Suit, Appeal or Proceeding, or an application for review of judgment
and includes every application seeking an order by way of aid pending final
adjudication of the matter arising in the Suit. Appeal, or Proceeding or for readmission of appeal dismissed for default.]
1.Rule 17 substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f 22.11.1984
 18. (1) Every Interlocutory Application shall be indicated by the abbreviation
"I.A." and shall be consecutively numbered in each suit, appeal or proceeding in
which it is filed.
 (2) All facts, on which an applicant relies for making the prayer or obtaining
the relief sought in the application, shall be set out in an affidavit accompanying
the application. Where, however, the facts on which the application is based appear
from the records of the case in the Court or relate to any act or conduct of the
applicant's pleader himself, the Court may permit a memorandum of facts signed
by the applicant's pleader to be filed instead of an affidavit:
2[Provided that it shall not be necessary to file any affidavit but only a
memorandum of facts signed by the pleader in interlocutory applications seeking
any relief other than the relief's of temporary injunction, attachment, arrest,
appointment of guardian or the appointment of receiver or amendment of a
pleadings]2
2. Proviso added by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984
 (3) Every Interlocutory Application shall bear the cause title of the main
matter in which it is made and shall set out the names of the applicants and the
opponents and their respective ranks in the main matter, the provision of law
under which it is made and the prayer or relief sought, in clear and precise terms.
 (4) The application shall be signed by the applicant or his pleader, who shall
enter the date on which such signature is made and in the date on which the
application is made.
3[(4) (a) The order sheet shall contain a separate column indicating the
number of interlocutory applications pending on the date of each hearing and the
Bench Clerk shall note the numbers of undisposed of interlocutory applications;
and the Presiding Officer shall endeavour for disposal of such applications
expeditiously.]
3. Sub-rule (4) (a) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984.
15
 (5) The order recorded in the order sheet shall disclose clearly the serial
number of the Interlocutory Application, if it relates to any such application.
19. (1) Every Interlocutory Application shall, after presentation, be
numbered and posted before the Court for orders:
 Provided that, when any party likely to be affected by it has already entered
appearance by pleader, no such application shall be so posted, unless such pleader
has been served with notice of the application by delivering to him a copy of the
application together with a copy of the supporting affidavit or memorandum of
facts, and the written acknowledgement over the signature of each such pleader or
his registered clerk is taken either by an endorsement on the application or
otherwise and is filed into Court along with the application.
 (2) If, however, the applicant's pleader makes an endorsement on the
application that such service on pleader was either refused to be accepted or could
not be effected in spite of due diligence, the Court may direct that the application
be numbered and posted.
 (3) Whenever it is intended to move the application as an emergent
application, the copy of the application served on every pleader under this rule
shall contain an endorsement stating that the application is intended to be moved
as an emergent application on the day specified in the endorsement.
20. An order passed by the Court on an Interlocutory Application before
service of notice on the opponent shall not be issued to the party affected by it or
the concerned authority or the subordinate Court, unless the applicant has filed
into Court a memo in Form No. 2 for service of notice of the application on parties
to whom notice has to be given or is directed by the Court, with the appropriate
amount of process fee affixed thereto in court-fee labels together with as many
plain paper copies of the application and supporting affidavit or memorandum of
facts as there are parties to be served, except where the applicant himself has
served such notice and produces into Court proof of such service.
 Where service of an order of injunction or like order is required to be made
on a party, the fee prescribed for such service shall also be paid before the order is
issued.
21. (1) Except in cases in which it is otherwise provided by these Rules,
notice of an application shall issue only when ordered by the Court.
16
 (2) Unless the Court orders otherwise, notice of an Interlocutory Application
need not be given to a party who having been served with the notice in the main
suit, appeal or other proceeding, has not entered appearance or to a party to whom
notice in the appeal has been dispensed with under the provisions of Rule 14 of
Order XLI of the Code.
22. Where notice of an application has to be given, the applicant shall,
within three days from the date of the order directing notice, file into Court a memo
in Form No.2 for service on parties to whom the notice has (or has been directed) to
be given with the appropriate amount of process fee affixed thereto court-fee labels
together with as many plain paper copies of the application and the supporting
affidavit or memorandum of facts as there are parties to be served:
 Provided that where the party to be served is represented by a pleader in the
main suit, appeal or other proceeding, notice of the application may be served on
the pleader in the manner prescribed in the Code.
23. There shall be a separate application in respect of each distinct prayer.
When several prayers are combined in one application, the Court may direct the
applicant to confine the application only to one of such prayers and to file a
separate application in respect of each of the others.
17
CHAPTER IV
AFFIDAVITS
(Read with Order XIX of the Code)
24. Every affidavit for use in a Civil Court shall set forth the cause title of
the proceeding or matter in which it is sought to be used and, in the case of an
affidavit in an Interlocutory Application, also the cause title of the Interlocutory
Application.
25. Every person making an affidavit shall be described in the affidavit in
such manner as will be sufficient to identify him clearly.
26. An affidavit shall be confined to statement of facts and avoid arguments.
27. When an affidavit contains statements of facts not within the deponent's
personal knowledge but based on the information received by the deponent, he
shall state so, and shall also state that he believes the same to be true and shall
give the source of such information wherever possible and the grounds of his belief,
if any.
28. Affidavits intended for use in the Civil Courts may be made before and
attested by any of the following persons, hereinafter called attesting officers, who,
for the said purpose, are hereby empowered to administer oath or solemn
affirmation:-
 (a) any Judicial Officer, Magistrate, or other Presiding Officer of Civil,
Criminal or Revenue Court;
 (b) any Registrar or Sub-Registrar under the Indian Registration Act;
 (c) the Registrar, Deputy Registrar, or Assistant Registrar of any High
Court;
 (d) the Chief Ministerial Officer of any Civil Court by whatever name called,
including any officer in charge of the duties of the Chief Ministerial
Officer for the time being;
1[dd) Assistant Registrars and Sheristedars of the Bangalore City Civil Court
and the Court of Small Causes, Bangalore;]
1.Clause (dd) inserted by Notification No. LCA-IV-417 of 1980, dated 16.6.1986, w.e.f. 26.6.1986
 (e) any Notary appointed under the Notaries Act (Central Act LIII of 1952).
2[28-A 3(1) The High Court may also appoint Advocates as Oath
Commissioners for the purpose of administering Oath or Affirmation in case of
affidavits intended for use in the Civil Courts. The number of Oath Commissioners
to be appointed for Bangalore and other places in the State may be as fixed by the
High Court from time to time. Advocates who have put in practice of not less than
2. Rule 28-A inserted by Notification No. LCA 1/571/85, dated 28.2.1991, w.e.f. 7.3.1991
3. Sub-rule (1) of Rule 28-A substituted by Notification No. LCA-I/108/1995, dated 19.4.2000, w.e.f. 15.6.2000
18
two years and not more than four years are eligible for appointment as Oath
Commissioners. The appointment as Oath Commissioners shall be initially for a
period of three years and may be extended for a period till the completion of
practice of seven years. However, the appointment as Oath Commissioners may be
cancelled at any time by the High Court.]
1[Provided that no person who has attainted the age of thirty five years
on the last date fixed for filing application shall be appointed as "Oath
Commissioner".]
1 Proviso inserted by Notification No. LCA-1 571/85/OC/92, dated 16.12.1993, w.e.f. 6.1.1994
 (2) The Oath Commissioner will be entitled to a fee of Rs.5.00 only per
affidavit. He shall keep and maintain a register in the form prescribed below in
which particulars of all affidavits shall be entered. The Oath Commissioner shall
pass a written receipt to the deponent for the fee received in the form prescribed as
hereunder. The receipt shall be in a printed form consisting of a foil and a
counterfoil, the foil being handed over to the deponent and the counterfoil, the foil
being handed over to the deponent and the counterfoil being preserved by the Oath
Commissioner for production at an inspection.
Note-1. The Oath Commissioner will be entitled to an additional fee of
Rs.10.00 from a deponent when he is required to attend the deponent's residence.
Note-2. With a view to ensure that particulars of all the affidavits which are
attested are duly entered in the register and receipts for the fee received are given,
the Oath Commissioner, shall send a report within 15 days of the end of every
three months about the total number of affidavits attested and the amount of fee
collected during the previous quarter to the Registrar or any other authorised
officer of the High Court of Karnataka, Bangalore. The Registrar or the authorised
officer may make such periodical inspection of their registers and receipt books
containing counterfoils, as may be considered necessary.
 Note-3. Every oath Commissioner shall have and use, a seal of such form
and design as may be prescribed and supplied by the High Court on payment of
prescribed fee.
 Note-4. Every Oath Commissioner shall handover the Seal, Register and
Receipt Books kept and maintained by him/her to the Registrar or the authorised
Officer, High Court of Karnataka, after he/she ceases to be an Oath Commissioner.
FORM OF REGISTER OF AFFIDAVIT
Sl.
No.
Name &
Address
of the
person
tendering
affidavit
Date of
Administering
Oath or
affirmation
Signature
or Thumb
Impression
of the
Deponent
Name of
the Court
in which
the
affidavit is
intended to
be filed
Name, address
and signature
of the person
identifying the
deponent who
is personally
known to the
Oath
Commissioner
Signature of
the Oath
Commissioner
19
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

FORM OF RECEIPT
(Both Foil and Counterfoil)
Receipt No. Date :
Place :
 Serial No. ................................................. in the Register of Affidavits.
 Received a sum of Rs. (in words) ..................................................................
from ................................... towards fee for administering Oath in respect of an
Affidavit.
[Signature of Oath Commissioner.]
20
1[29. A deponent of an affidavit shall sign or make his mark at the foot of
every page of the affidavit and also at the end of it. The attesting officer shall
authenticate every correction, alteration or interlineation by placing his initials
near it and also enter at the foot of every page, the number of such authenticate
corrections, etc., or enter the word 'nil' if there is none and initial such entry and
sign his name and enter his designation at the end of the affidavit and affix thereto
his official seal of his court together with the date. The fact of the Oath having been
adminstered or the solemn affirmation having been made in his presence and the
contents of the affidavit having been explained in the language known to the
deponent, and translated wherever necessary to the deponent, shall be recorded by
the attesting officer before he affixes his signature.]1
1. Rule 29 substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984.
30. If the deponent is not personally known to the attesting officer, he shall
be identified by a person known to the attesting officer and the fact of such
identification together with the name and description of the person making the
identification shall be noted at the end of the affidavit and the signature of such
person shall be affixed. If the deponent not known to the attesting officer cannot be
so identified, the left thumb impression of such deponent shall also be affixed at
the end of the affidavit and be certified to be such impression by the attesting
officer.
31. If the deponent appears to be illiterate or blind or is unacquainted with
the language in which the affidavit is made or written, the affidavit shall be read
out and explained to the deponent in a language known to him in the presence of
the attesting officer, who shall certify that it was so explained in his presence and
that the deponent appeared to understand the same and signed his name or made
his mark in the presence of the attesting officer.
32. If any document is referred to in the affidavit and produced with it, the
attesting officer shall affix his signature to an endorsement thereon as follows:-
 "This is the document referred to as Exhibit .................... in the affidavit of
........................................................... sworn/solemnly affirmed before me this the
.......................... day of ......................... 20 ......."
21
CHAPTER V
ISSUES
(Read with Order XIV of the Code)
33. Procedure in regard to framing of issues.- In framing issues, the Court
shall proceed as follows:-
1[(a) Every material proposition of fact and every proposition of law, which is
affirmed by one side and denied by the other shall be made the subject
of a separate issue. Ordinarily, the following matters shall form the
basis of framing issues, namely.-
 (i) The pleadings in the case;
 (ii) All documents, including copies of entries; in shop books,
accounts, etc., if any, produced at any time before the framing of
issues, by the parties or their pleaders or other witnesses.
 (iii) Record of examination, if any, of the parties or their pleaders or
witnesses, including those examined by the Court under Rule 4 of
Order XIV of the Code; and
 (iv) Oral submissions made or replies given by parties or their pleaders
to questions put by the Court at the time of framing of issues.]1
1. Clause (a) substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
 (b) Every issue of fact shall be so framed as to indicate on whom the
burden of proof lies.
 (c) Every issue of law shall be so framed as to indicate, either by a
statement of admitted or alleged facts, or by reference to the pleadings
or some document mentioned therein, the precise question of law to be
decided.
 (d) No proposition of fact which is not itself a material proposition, but is
relevant only as tending to prove a material proposition, shall be made
the subject of an issue.
 (e) No question regarding admissibility of evidence shall be made the
subject of an issue.
Note.- Issues shall be framed by the Presiding Officer and written or typed
on a separate sheet of paper and shall be signed and dated by him.

1[33-A. The Court shall determine at the time of issuing the summons,
whether it shall be.-
 (a) for the settlement of issues only, or,
22
 (b) for the defendant to appear and state whether he contests or does not
contest the claim and directing him if he contests, to receive directions as to the
date on which he has to file his written statement, the date of trial and other
matters, and if he does not contest, for final disposal of the suit at once, or he
contests or does not contest the claim and directing him if he contests, to receive
directions as to the date on which he has to file his written statement, the date of
trial and other matters, and if he does not contest, for final disposal of the suit and
the summons shall contain a direction accordingly:
 Provided that in every suit heard by a Court of Small Causes, the summons
shall be for final disposal of the suit.
33-B. Except where a suit is disposed of solely on the question of jurisdiction
or on the ground that there is a bar to the suit by any law for the time being in
force, in all other cases the Court shall pronounce Judgment, on all issues in the
case.]
1. Rules 33-A and 33-B inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f.
22-11-1984
23
CHAPTER VI
POSTING AND ADJOURNMENT
(Read with Order XVII of the Code)
34. No Judicial order, including orders of adjournment, posting of cases or
ex parte orders, shall be pronounced otherwise than in open Court.
35. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-rule (2), all suits, appeals
or other proceedings shall be taken up for hearing in their chronological orders.
 (2) Preference shall be given for the disposal of the following cases, amongst
the cases ready for hearing.-
 (a) cases which are holding up the decision of other older proceedings;
 (b) cases on account of which criminal proceedings have been stayed;
 (c) cases involving maintenance claims;
 (d) cases in which an Army, Navy or Air Force personnel is a party;
 (e) Matrimonial cases;
 (f) Land Acquisition cases;
 (g) cases under the Arbitration Act;
 (h) other cases in which the Judge considers it expedient to give preference
for reasons to be recorded in writing.
 (3) Cases mentioned in sub-rule (2) above should not ordinarily be kept
pending for more than six months.
36. In the case mentioned in clause (d) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 35, if upon an
application of any such person as is mentioned in that Rule, the Court finds it
impracticable to conclude the case within the period of leave granted to that person
according to the certificate to be furnished by him from the competent authority,
the Court shall record the reasons therefor and furnish a copy of the order of the
Court made in his application, containing the reasons for the order, free of cost.
 37. Court Diary.- In every Court a Court Diary (Register No.IX) shall be
maintained in which the Bench Clerk shall at the end of each working day, briefly
note the proceedings of that day in each case and shall also note the dates of
adjournment and post the cases adjourned from that day to the pages in the book
for such further dates. The Court Diary shall always be left in a conspicuous part of
the Court Hall and shall be accessible to all persons.
38. When a case is adjourned to a distant date for trial after the issues are
framed, the parties shall be directed to take out summonses for their witnesses at
once, the summonses being returnable on an intermediate date so that they may be
re-issued a second time, if necessary.
24
CHAPTER VII
PROCESSES
(Read with Order V of the Code)
39. Issue of Summons or Notice.- 1[(1)] In any proceeding in which
summons (other than witness summons) or notice (other than a notice on an
Interlocutory Application) has to be issued by the Court to any person, the
concerned party shall, within seven days from the date of the order directing the
issue of summons or notice, file into Court a memo in Form No.2 with the requisite
amount of process fee affixed thereto in court-fee labels, together with the required
number of duly attested copies of the plaint, original petition, concise statement,
memorandum of appeal or cross-objection as the case may be, for service on the
party concerned with the summons or notice, unless the above requirement has
already been complied with. The copies referred to above shall show the date of
presentation of the original and the name of the pleader, if any, who presented the
same.]
1. Original Rule 39 re-numbered as sub-rule (1) by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. D
22.11.1984
2[(2) Whenever the Court directs the summons or notices to be served by
Registered Post Acknowledgement Due, the concerned party shall furnish sufficient
number of envelopes, acknowledgements due, detailed address of the party/parties
with proper postage, together with the required number of duly attested copies of
plaint, original petition, concise statement, memorandum of appeal or cross
objections, as the case may be.]
2. Sub-rule (2) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984
40. (1) In all cases where processes of the nature of summons (including
witness summons) or notice (including notice of an Interlocutory Application) have
to be issued, the parties or their pleaders on whose behalf such summons or notice
is issued may file with their memos in Form No.2 or list of witnesses as the case
may be, the appropriate forms of process as prescribed in the Code or any other
law applicable to the case, in duplicate, legibly filled up, and pay process fee at the
reduced rates prescribed by the Process Rules made by the High Court for such
cases. However, the date of appearance and the date of the process shall be left
blank for being filled up by the office of the court before issue. If the forms are not
filled up by the parties or their pleaders as stated above, the process fee has to be
paid without any reduction.
3[Explanation.- For the purpose of sub-rule (1), the words "appropriate
forms" shall include forms printed privately.]
3. Explanation inserted by Notification No. ROC 3466/68, dated 12/13-8-1969, w.e.f. 21-8-1969
25
 (2) The parties or their pleaders shall sign the forms in the left bottom
corner, and will be responsible for the accuracy of the entries therein.
 (3) Where orders for the issue of process are passed by the Court, the date
fixed for appearance will be inserted in the form and the process will be dated and
signed by an officer of the Court duly authorised in that behalf.
41. Summons or Notice to Government or Railway Officials.- (1)
Whenever a summons or notice is to be issued to any person in the service of
Government or the Railway, the Court issuing the same shall, having regard to the
previous of Rule 6 of Order V and Rule 9 of Order XVI of the Code, fix such time for
compliance as would enable such person to communicate with his official superiors
for suitable arrangements being made for the discharge of his duties during his
absence.
 (2) In all cases against the Railway Administration, a copy of the summons
or notice shall be simultaneously posted direct to the Head Office of the Railway in
addition to regular service in the normal course.
42. Tom Tom Charges.- (1) A fee of 1[five rupees]1 will be charged as tom
tom batta in all the Courts, the charge being recovered from the party at whose
instance the tom tom has to be made.
1 Substituted for the words "one rupees" by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.
22.11.1984
 (2) When the process is to be issued beyond the jurisdiction of the Court a
note shall be made on the process that the proper fee has been paid for the
purpose.
43. Whenever summonses or notices are sent for service to any Court in any
other State in India, the prescribed forms in English shall be used or, if Kannada
forms be used, they shall be accompanied by translations in English.
44. Summonses or notices issued to Army, Navy or Air Force personnel shall
be in the prescribed forms in English and if Kannada forms are to be used, they
shall be accompanied by translations in English.
45. Summons to an officer in the Secretariat of the House of the People or
the Council of States or House of State Legislatures (or any duly informed officer in
the Secretariat of the House) shall be issued in Form No.3.
46. Signature to Processes.- (1) Warrants for the arrest of any person shall
be signed by the Presiding Officer of the Court. All other Processes may be signed
by the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court with the words “By Order of Court”
preceding the signature:
26
Provided that in the case of summonses and notices the Chief Ministerial
Officer may make use of facsimile of his signature subject to the condition that he
uses it with his own hand or if he allows any one else to use it, it shall be used only
in his presence and under his supervision. Such facsimile shall always be kept in
the personal custody of Chief Ministerial Officer.
 (2) Every process shall bear the seal of the Court.
47. The processes shall be entered in Register No. XI and the number given
to each in the first column of the Register shall be entered on the said process.
Processes shall thereafter be issued for service without undue delay, precedence
being given to emergent processes.
48. A summons issued to a witness shall mention the batta to be paid to
him, but notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 3 of Order XVI of the Code,
such batta shall be retained with the Court Nazir until payment is ordered by the
Judge.
27
CHAPTER VIII
EVIDENCE
(Read with Order XVIII of the Code)
49. Typewritten Evidence.- A typewriter may be used by the Presiding Judge
himself for the purpose of recording deposition and memoranda of evidence, in
which case a certificate that this has been done must be appended to at the end.
Each page of the deposition must be attested by the Judge's signature or initials:
 Provided that when the Presiding Judge himself does not use the typewriter,
the evidence may be typewritten to his dictation in open Court as the evidence
proceeds. Each page of the deposition or memorandum of evidence so typewritten
shall be attested by the Judge's signature and a certificate to the effect that the
deposition or memorandum of evidence is so typewritten to the Judge's dictation
shall be added at the end.
(Read with Order XVIII, Rule 14 of the Code)
50. Whenever evidence is typewritten to the dictation of the Presiding Judge
in open Court, then, notwithstanding anything contained in Order XVIII of the
Code, it shall not be necessary for the Judge himself to make a memorandum of
the substance of what has been deposed to by the witness.
51. Every record (including memorandum) of evidence of a witness shall
show in the heading his name, his father's name, his age, residence and profession
or occupation.
52. In all original cases, evidence taken by the Judge shall be recorded on
separate sheets in Form No.4. When sheets are added to depositions of witnesses,
the number of witness and page shall be written at the top of every such addition
sheet.
53. All additions, alternations, etc., in the deposition shall be attested by
the Presiding Judge.
28
CHAPTER IX
WITNESSES
[Read with Order XVI, Rule 2 of the Code)

1[54. Classes of witnesses.- (1) Witnesses shall be classified into four
classes.
Class-A Professional/experts whose annual income is Rs. 3,00,000/- or
more.
 Class-B Persons whose annual income is above Rs. 2,00,000/- but does
not exceed Rs.3,00,000/-
 Class-C Persons whose annual income is less than Rs. 2,00,000/-
 Class-D Official witnesses attending courts in private capacity shall be
entitled to T.A. and D.A. as per Rule 451 of the Karnataka Civil
Services Rules.
 (2) The following will be the scale of allowances to witnesses.
Class of
Witness
Traveling allowance for each of
the journeys to and from court
house where it is in a different
station from that of the witness
Subsistence allowance
including loss of wages per day
 By rail By Road Bangalore Other than
Bangalore
Class-A Single-II
Class A.C. fare
Rs.4/- per Km
where he/she
has travelled
by private
motor
carriage.
Rs. Ps.
200.00
Rs. Ps.
150.00
Class-B Single-II
Class
Sleeper fare
Actual bus
fare or as the
Presiding
judge may
decide
100-00 75-00
Class-C Single lowest
class Fare
Actual bus
fare or sleeper
Charges for
overnight
Journey as the
case may be
75.00 50.00
29
Class-D Official witnesses attending courts in private capacity shall be
entitled to T.A. and D.A. as per Rule 451 of the Karnataka Civil
Services Rules.
Note.- In case of witnesses not covered under above table, TA/DA shall be as
decided by the Presiding Judge.]1
1. Rule 54 substituted by Notification No. LAW 08 LAC 2005, dated 6-4-2006 w.e.f. 8-6-2006
 55. (1) Witnesses examined for a plaintiff or petitioner shall be referred to as
plaintiff's or petitioner's witnesses indicated by the letters 'P.W.'. Such witnesses
shall be serially numbered in the order in which they are examined and shall be
referred to as P.W.1, P.W.2 and so on.
 (2) Witnesses examined for one or more defendants or opponents, shall be
referred to as defence witness indicated by the letters 'D.W.'. They shall be serially
numbered in the order in which they are examined and shall be referred to as
D.W.1, D.W.2 and so on.
 (3) Whenever witnesses are examined as Court witnesses, they shall be
referred to as Court witnesses indicated by the letters 'C.W.'. Such witnesses shall
be serially numbered in the order in which they are examined and shall be referred
to as C.W. 1, C.W.2 and so on.
56. Expert Opinion.- (1) Whenever a party desires the examination of a
finger-print or handwriting by the Finger-print Expert or the Handwriting Expert of
the Government of Karnataka, Bangalore, as the case may be that party shall
deposit in the Court such amount as may be prescribed by the Government from
time to time, for that purpose. (Vide Appendix C)
 (2) The party or his pleader desiring the expert's opinion shall file in Court, a
memo of instructions in duplicate detailing the writings or finger prints disputed
and admitted, and points on which opinion is required.
57. Attendance of Finger-print or Handwriting Expert.- (1) Summons for
attendance shall be issued to the Government Finger-print or Handwriting Expert
only when the Court is satisfied that such evidence is necessary for the case.
30
 (2) A party calling the expert to give evidence in Court shall deposit the
travelling expenses of the expert including the charges for a day's attendance of the
expert at the rates prescribed by the Government from time to time (Vide
Appendix C).
 (3) The travelling allowance payable to the Expert under the Karnataka Civil
Services Rules may be sent in advance with the summons to the concerned Head of
the Department for payment or be paid to him in Court
 (4) All exhibits forwarded for the expert's opinion shall be sent by registered
and not by ordinary post.
58. The provisions of Rules 56 and 57 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the
cases of other Government Experts. (Vide Appendix C)
 59. Examination dispensed with.- If the parties at the trial dispense with
the examination of any witness who may be in attendance, they or their pleaders
should sign and file a memo to that effect.
60. Witness List.- (1) A party applying for summonses to witnesses shall file
a list stating clearly, as far as is known to him, the name, full description and
address of each witness, the class to which he belongs according to rules and the
approximate distance of his residence from the Court.
 (2) The list of witnesses shall be filed within the times specified by the Court
or when no such time is specified, within 15 days from the time when the case is
first posted for evidence:
 Provided that the Court may, on application extend the time.
 (3) The party filing the list shall file along with it sufficient number of copies
thereof to be given to the opposite side.
61. The amount of witness batta payable to each witness in the list should
be calculated according to the prescribed scale and noted against each, and the
total struck at the bottom.
62. Except in cases where the party undertakes to produce his witnesses,
the amount of batta should be deposited in Court along with the list. If a witness
has already received batta, that fact should be stated in the list with necessary
particulars as to date of payment and amount paid. If the party applying for
summons has already any batta amount to his credit in deposit and desires to
adjust it towards the sum mentioned in the list, this prayer shall also be stated.
63. Any list not substantially complying with the above requirements or in
respect of which the amount of witness batta due is not deposited in Court to the
credit of the party, shall not be received, or if received, shall be returned to the
party or his pleader for rectification, within one week of its presentation.
31
64. If a witness appearing in Court claims a higher rate of batta, the Court
shall summarily investigate the claim and pass suitable orders in accordance with
the rules.
65. In cases where at the request of a party, witness summons is handed
over to him for service, he shall be bound to tender the same to the witness in the
usual manner; and when service is effected the signature of the witness shall be
obtained on the original summons which shall be returned to the court.
66. Interpreter.- When a witness gives evidence in a language not
understood by the Court, the Presiding Judge is authorised to employ an
interpreter and pay him a reasonable sum for his services not exceeding Rs.20 per
day, the cost being borne, in the first instance, by the party calling such witness;
such charges shall be costs in the suit.
CHAPTER X
COMMISSIONS
(Read with Order XXVI of the Code)
67. Expenses of Commission.- (1) Whenever the Court finds that any sum
paid into Court under Rule 15 of Order XXVI of the Code is insufficient, the Court
may require the party to deposit within such time as it may specify any additional
sum for expenses of the commission (including any fee to be paid to the
Commissioner).
 (2) All expenses of the commission shall be costs in the cause unless the
Court otherwise directs.
68. Commission to Courts outside Karnataka State.- Whenever a
commission is issued to a District Court in any other state in India, such Court
shall be authorised to delegate the execution of that commission to any Court
subordinate to it.
32
CHAPTER XI
DOCUMENTS
A. GENERAL
(Read with Order XIII of the Code)
69. (1) The Court may if it requires, direct the parties to produce all the
documentary evidence in their possession or power, on which they intend to rely,
on such date prior to the settlement of issues as may be specified by the Court.
 (2) Without prejudice to what is contained in sub-rule (1), the Court may fix
any date within a period of fifteen days from the date of the settlement of issues, for
the production by the parties of such documents (including certified copies of
public documents) on which they intend to rely and which have not been produced
earlier; provided that the Court, for good cause shown to its satisfaction for the
non-production thereof, may, after recording the reasons for so doing, permit
production of documents at any subsequent time.
70. (1) Whenever a party or his pleader produces documents into Court, he
shall do so with a list in triplicate in Form No. 5 of the Appendix H in the First
Schedule of the Code. The list together with the documents shall be produced
before the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court. The original list with the duplicate
shall be retained in the Court (the duplicate being for delivery to the opposite side)
and the triplicate shall after scrutiny be returned to the person producing it with
the signature of the Chief Ministerial Officer who receives the documents. Where
there are numerous parties on the opposite side, represented by different pleaders,
a sufficient number of copies of such list shall be furnished by the party producing
the documents for being delivered to pleaders appearing for the several parties.
 (2) The Chief Ministerial Officer shall provide for the proper custody of the
documents so received. He shall himself make entries or cause entries to be made
by some other official under his direction, in the order sheet of the case in which
the documents have been produced, mentioning the date on which the list or lists
of documents have been produced and the number of documents produced. Within
three days after the documents have been received, the list or lists together with
the order sheet in which entries as above have been made, shall be placed before
the Presiding Officer of the Court, who shall affix his initials together with the date,
to the list or lists and to the said entries in the order sheet.
71. The plaintiff in a suit shall file with the original document of which the
suit is based, copy of the same duly certified by the Chief Ministerial Officer of the
33
Court that it has been compared with the original and found correct. The original
shall be in the custody of the Chief Ministerial Officer and the copy in the file.
72. At the time of receiving the plaint, if an endorsement of payment or
acknowledgement of liability is found to have been made on the document on which
the suit is based, the substance of such endorsement shall be noted in the order
sheet by the Chief Ministerial Officer and if there is no such endorsement such fact
shall also be noted by him, so as to prevent tampering with the document in the
office during the pendency of the suit.
73. If a document produced in Court appears to be defaced, torn or in any
way damaged or where its condition or appearance requires special notice, a note of
its condition and appearance shall be made, at the time of its production, in the list
of documents by the officer receiving the same. If there is no such list, such note
shall be made in the order sheet.
74. When a party to a suit produces any original document, on which any
counter-claim or set off is based, he must produce with it a copy of the document.
If the counter-claim or set off is based only on any endorsement on a registered
document, a copy of such endorsement may be filed.
75. (1) When a document of historical or antiquarian interest is produced or
tendered in evidence, the Court shall make every possible endeavour to prevent its
being defaced by endorsement or exhibit marks or by having the seal of the court
impressed upon it. In case the parties agree a photostat copy may be subsituted for
the original, or the document may be enclosed in a sealed cover or kept in a locked
and sealed box, the necessary particulars being endorsed on such cover or box.
 (2) Whenever the Court so directs, or at the request of the person producing
the same, any share certificate or other valuable security shall be enclosed in a
packet and sealed and kept in the safe custody of the Chief Ministerial Officer. The
serial number or the exhibit number of every such document contained within and
also the name of the clerk who enclosed it in the packet shall be noted on the
sealed packet.
 B. PRODUCTION OF RECORDS
(Read with Order XIII of the Code)
I. Records in the custody of a Court.
76. An application for the production of records in the custody of a Court
shall specify the particular documents required to be produced. Unless it is made
to appear to the Court that the production of the original documents is necessary,
34
the party shall be required to obtain and file certified copies thereof and the
originals shall not be sent for.
77. When a Court finds it necessary to require the production of the records
of another Court, it shall address a letter of request in Form No. 5 to the Presiding
Judge of the Court.
 (Read with Order XIII, Rule 10 of the Code)
78. Where any Court has to send for any document either from its own
records or from those of another Court under Rule 10 of Order XIII of the Code,
that Court may require the party at whose instance it is sent for, to deposit in
Court before the letter of request is issued, such sum as it may consider necessary
to meet the estimated cost of making a copy of the document when produced.
79. The production of the document in compliance with the letter of request
mentioned in Rule 77, shall be notified by the Court to the parties or their pleaders
in the manner it thinks fit, where upon the parties may apply for inspection. After
the document has been admitted in evidence, the Court shall, unless it considers it
necessary to retain the original, direct the parties to specify the portion or portions
thereof on which they respectively rely and require a copy to be made of the same
at the expense of the party requiring such portion or portions and shall thereafter,
as early as possible, return the original to the Court from which it was received,
retaining the copy as part of the record.
II. Records in the custody of a public officer other than a Court
80. (1) Summons for the production of documents or records in the custody
of a public officer other than a court shall be in Form No. 6 and shall be addressed
to the Head of the Office concerned.
Note.- Where the summons is for the production of village accounts, field
measurement books or other village records, such summons shall be addressed to
the Tahsildar concerned.
 (2) Every application for such summons shall be supported by an affidavit
setting out (i) the document or documents, the production of which is required, (ii)
the relevancy of the document or documents, and (iii) in cases where the
production of a certified copy would meet the purpose, whether an application was
made to the proper officer for a certified copy or copies and the result of such
application.
 (3) No Court shall issue such summons unless it considers that the
production of the original is necessary or is satisfied that the application for a
certified copy has been duly made but has not been granted. The Court shall, in
35
every case, record its reason in writing and shall, before the summons is issued,
require the applicant to deposit in Court such sum as it may consider necessary to
meet the estimated cost of making a copy of the document when produced and
sufficient postage stamps for the transmission and retransmission of the
document, in addition to the prescribed process fee.
III. Records in the custody of the House of the people and the
council of States
81. Summons for documents in the custody of the House of the People or
the Council of States or the Houses of State Legislatures shall be issued in
Form No.7.
 C. Admission of Documents
(Read with Order XIII, Rules 3 to 7 of the Code)
 82. Marking of Exhibits.- (1) Only documents admitted in evidence shall be
marked as exhibits.
 (2) The number and other identifying mark of every exhibit should be in large
figures in red ink or red pencil.
 (3) All exhibits should be folded, as far as possible, to a uniform size,
generally to the size of a half sheet of foolscap paper, and exhibits of small size
should be attached to a half sheet of foolscap paper by a thread.
 (4) When an exhibit consists of more sheets or papers than one, the number
of such sheets or papers should be shown in brackets below the number of the
exhibit.
 (5) Whenever an exhibit is removed during the pendency of a suit or other
proceeding, a slip of paper of the size of a quarter sheet of foolscap paper, shall be
inserted in its place stating the exhibit number, the purpose for which it has been
removed and the name of the person or the designation of the officer in whose
custody it is or, if removed and entered as an exhibit in another case, its exhibit
number in that case.
 Whenever a share certificate or a promissory note or a valuable security has
been exhibited and kept separately in a sealed packet, a slip as above shall be
inserted in lieu of the original in the file of exhibits and an entry made thereon to
show where the original exhibit has been placed.
 (6) Where an exhibit is too bulky or cannot be conveniently included in the
file of exhibits, a slip of paper of the size of a quarter sheet of foolscap paper shall
36
be placed instead in the file, giving the number of the exhibit and its description
and an entry made to show where the original exhibit has been placed.
83. Documents not admitted in evidence may be returned, on oral request,
to the persons entitled to receive them. Whenever documents are so returned, a
receipt containing the description of the documents returned shall be obtained
under the signature of the person receiving the documents. Such receipt shall be
filed in the record in the place of the documents returned. Any document which
may not have been given back owing to the refusal or omission of the party or his
pleader to take them, shall be filed separately as a supplement to the record.
(Read with Order XIII, Rule 7 of the Code)
84. (1) Separate lists of the documents admitted in evidence on behalf of
each party shall be prepared in Form No. 8.
 (2) Document should be entered in these lists in the order in which they are
admitted and marked. If any document has been admitted subject to objection, the
fact should be noted in the column for remarks.
85. (1) Exhibits shall be indicated by the abbreviation "Ex." and marked as
follows:-
 (a) if marked for the plaintiff or plaintiffs, with the capital letter 'P' followed
by a numeral, e.g., P1, P2, P3, etc., consecutively;
 (b) if marked for the defendent or defedants, with the capital letter 'D'
followed by a numeral, e.g., D1, D2, D3, etc. consecutively;
 (c) in the case of Court exhibits, with the capital letter 'C' followed by a
numeral, e.g., C1, C2, C3, etc. consecutively.
 (2) Marking series.- A series of similar exhibits shall be marked with the
same capital letter and numeral followed by small letters of the alphabet in
brackets such as P1(a), P1(b), P1(c)..... P1(z). When small letters of the alphabet, are
exhausted, double small letters shall be used such as P1(aa), P1(bb), P1(cc).......
P1(zz).
 (3) The method of marking indicated above shall apply mutatis mutandis to
petitions and other proceedings.
 (4) Marking in subsequent proceeding.- If in a proceeding subsequent to the
trial of a suit or matter, further exhibits are admitted in evidence, they shall be
marked in accordance with the above scheme with numbers consecutive to the
number on the last exhibit previously field.
37
 (5) Every exhibit marked shall be stamped with an exhibit seal as under:
 Court of ...................................
 Case No ...................................
 Produced by ............................
 Admitted through....................
 Marked for .............................
 Ex. No....................................
 Date: Judge
Note 1. Care should be taken to see that the text of the exhibit is not defaced or
obliterated while affixing the seal.
 2. Where there is no space on the exhibit itself for affixing the seal, a
blank sheet of paper may be attached thereto and the seal affixed
thereon so as to cover a portion of the exhibit.
86. Return of documents.- (1) No document admitted in evidence shall be
returned except in accordance with Rule 9 of Order XIII of the Code, before the
proceeding has finally concluded.
Explanation.- Where there is an appeal or revision pending or the time
prescribed therefor has not expired, the matter shall not be deemed to be finally
concluded.
 (2) An application for return of any document shall be made to the Court in
which it was originally field or to the Court of appeal or revision, where any such
proceeding is pending.
 (3) If any document has been transmitted to any other Court, the same may
be got back by the Court to which the application for return has been made, and
returned to the applicant.
 (4) When the record has been transmitted to the Central Record Room, the
applicant for return of exhibited documents shall, along with his application,
furnish the necessary transmission charges in postage stamps for getting the
record from the Central Record Room and retransmitting it. 1[A party may apply
direct to the officer incharge of the Central Record Room if he so chooses, with
aforesaid charges in postage stamps.]
1. Added by Notification No. ROC 2648/1969, dated 12/15.06.1970, w.e.f. 25.06.1970
D. PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
(Read with Order XIII, Rule 9 of the Code)
87. (1) When public or official documents from any Court or public office are
produced at the hearing of any suit by an officer deputed for that purpose, the said
documents shall be inspected in open Court without undue delay and returned to
38
that officer unless they are required as exhibits in the suit before the Court or
retained for the Presiding Judge's personal inspection.
 (2) When such documents are retained, a receipt containing the descriptive
list of the documents shall be given to the officer producing them, and a duplicate
of the receipt placed with the documents. Any apparent erasure of alteration in any
document shall be noted in the said list.
 (3) Such documents shall, as long as they remain in the custody of the Court
which required their production, be kept in a sealed packet properly labelled, and
this packet shall not be opened except in the presence of the Presiding Judge.
 (4) Whenever the documents retained as aforesaid are no longer required,
the same shall be returned in a sealed packet to the concerned Court or Office.
88. If a document admitted in evidence is an entry in a public record
produced from a public office, or by a public officer, the Court may require a
certified copy of the entry to be furnished.-
 (a) When the record is produced on behalf of a party, then by that party, or
 (b) When the record is produced in obedience to an order of the Court
made on its own motion, then by the party on whose behalf it is
exhibited; and on production of such certified copy, the Court may
cause the record to be returned to the public officer concerned.
89. Deposit for postage.- If a record or a document (not falling within the
provisions of Article 11(c) of Schedule II of the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits
Valuation Act, 1958) is required to be received and returned by post the Court may
direct the applicant to deposit in the Court a sum sufficient to defray the postage
required for the same both ways. The expenses incurred for this purpose shall
unless the Court otherwise orders, be costs in the cause.
90. Time for taking back documents.- Any party applying for return of
papers or documents, shall take them back within 2 months from the date of order
for return. On his failure to do so, the application shall be filed:
 Provided that, nothing aforesaid shall prevent the party from making a fresh
application for the return of the said documents.
CHAPTER XII
JUDGMENTS AND ORDERS
(Read with Order XX of the Code)
91. Form in Civil Suits.- The title sheet for judgments in civil suits shall be
in Form No. 9 and the Presiding Judge shall cause the particulars therein to be
filled up.
39
92. (1) The judgments of a Court of Small Causes need not contain more
than the points for determination and the decision thereon. (Vide Order XX, Rule
4(1) of the Code).
 (2) Judgments of other Courts shall contain:
 (a) a concise statement of the case (summary of the pleadings);
 (b) the points for determination (issues);
 (c) the decision thereon (finding on each issue);
 (d) the reasons for such decision; and
 (e) the relief granted.
 (Read with Order XX, Rule 4(2) of the Code)
 (3) A list in Form No. 10 showing the witnesses examined by each party and
a list in Form No. 8 showing the documents exhibited by each party shall be
appended as an annexure to the judgement.
93. Form in Appeals.- (1) The title sheet for judgments in appeals shall be
in Form No. 11 and the Presiding Judge shall cause the particulars therein to be
filled up.
 (2) The judgment of an Appellate Court shall contain:
(a) a brief statement of the contentions of the parties in the trial Court and
the findings thereon by that Court;
 (b) the grounds urged at the hearing of the appeal;
 (c) the points for determination;
 (d) the decision thereon;
 (e) the reason for the decision; and
 (f) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief granted.
 (3) When the relief granted is not in accordance with the prayer portion in
the plaint, it is desirable that the Judge should clearly set out in the judgment, in
precise terms, the relief actually granted in order to ensure that the decree shall be
drawn up in accordance with the judgment.
(Read with Order XLI, Rule 31 of the Code)
94. Orders in other proceedings.- In other proceedings the orders of the
Court shall be written mutatis mutandis in the same form as that prescribed for
judgments in suits or appeals, as the case may be.
40
95. (1) Where Indian dates are mentioned in judgments, the corresponding
English dates shall be added. If a word in regional language is used, its nearest
English equivalent shall be added in brackets.
 (2) In judgments references to reported cases shall invariably be cited both
by names of parties and by the number of year of the volume and the page of the
Report.
 (3) The paragraphs of the judgment shall be numbered.
 (4) Every page shall be initialled by the Presiding offier, who pronounces the
judgment.
 (5) Whenever in the record of evidence or the judgment in any case the date
of any transaction, event or exhibit is given according to the several modes in vogue
among the people (e.g. the Saka or the Hijri) the corresponding date according to
the English calendar shall be inserted in brackets.
96. All judgments and proceedings shall be written only on foolscap paper
leaving a margin equal to one fourth of the width of the sheet, on the left on odd
numbered pages and on the right on even numbered pages.
Note.- This is to facilitate stitching in book form and avoid written portion
being stitched into.
97. Fixing a date for pronouncing judgment.- Whenever a Judge reserves
a judgment or order, he shall fix a date for pronouncing the same, and in the event
of the judgment or order not being ready on that date, the case (in which such
judgment or order is reserved) shall be called on that day and adjourned to another
date for pronouncing the same.
(Read with Order XX Rule 1 of the Code)
98. Maintenance decrees and other decrees for periodical payments shall
always specify a particular day in each month or year on which such payments are
to be made.
1[98-A. (1) The Presiding Officers of all Civil Courts shall forward to the
Director, Forensic Science Laboratory, Bangalore, copies of their judgment or final
orders in all cases in which comments (whether favourable or adverse) have been
made by the Court in respect of the opinion of the chemical examiner or the
Ballistic Expert or the Expert in Forensic Medicines or the Hand-writing Expert.]
1. Rule 98-A inserted by Notification No. ROC 3297/A/1968, dated 15.07.1969 w.e.f. 24.07.1969
41
CHAPTER XIII
COSTS
(Read with Sections 35 and 35-A and Order XXXIII, Rule 16 of the Code)
1[99. (1) The costs of a party in any proceeding shall, unless otherwise
ordered by the Court include:
 (a) The Court fee paid on-
 (i) his pleadings;
 (ii) the documents required to be produced by him;
 (iii) the vakalat filed by him (one set only);
 (iv) the processes and postage issued at his instance;
 (v) the certified copies furnished to him as per rules and filed by him as
 required by any law or as ordered by the Court, or exhibited in the case;
 (vi) interlocutory applications other than applications seeking adjournments;
 (b) Costs incurred in obtaining the certified copies or copies referred to in (a)
 (i) to (vi) above;
 (c) batta paid to his witnesses, who had appeared and given evidence
 (d) cost incurred in interlocutory matters which are made costs in the cause;
(e) an amount calculated at the rate of 50 paise for each process (being the
charges for preparation of such process) prepared by a party and filed
into Court under Rule 40;
Note- Process issued, whether in respect of different persons or not, shall be
treated as different processes, for the above purpose but, process prepared in
duplicate shall be treated as one process.
 (f) fee actually paid by him to his pleader or pleaders not exceeding the
amount calculated according to the next succeeding rule:
 Provided that such fee shall not be included in the costs, if he has not filed
within five days from the date of Judgment or order, or such further period as may
be allowed by the Court, a certificate by the pleader or pleaders as the case may be,
certifying that the fee has been received by him or them:
 Provided further that in the case of a pleader appearing for the Government
or other local body or authority or Government Company or Corporation, a
certificate by him that he is assured of the receipt of such fee shall be sufficient;

1. Rule 99 substituted by Notification No.LCA/1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
42
1[Provided also that where the Government is a party to a proceeding and is
represented by an officer of the Government, the costs shall include the Pleader's
fee calculated according to the next succeeding rule.
Note.- The officer representing the Government need not file any certificate
about pleader's fee.]1
1. Third Proviso and note inserted by Notification No. LCA-I/187/86, dated 2-3-1993 w.e.f. 18-3-1993
 (g) Costs incurred in the examination of a witness on commission under
Section 133 and Order XXVI of the Code; the costs to be awarded shall
not be less than Rs. 100 and shall not exceed Rs.200;
 (h) Expenditure incurred for giving of any notice required to be given by
law before the institution of the suit;
 (i) Expenditure incurred on any notice, which though not required to be
given by law, has been given by any party to the suit to any other party
before the institution of the suit. The costs to be awarded in this regard
shall not be less than Rs. 50 subject to a maximum of Rs. 100;
 (j) Expenditure incurred on the typing, writing or printing of pleadings
filed by any party;
 (k) Charges paid by a party for inspection of the records of Court for the
purposes of the suit;
 (l) Expenditure incurred by a party for producing witnesses, even though
not summoned through Court;
 (m) In the case of appeals, charges incurred by a party for obtaining any
copies of Judgments and decrees which are required to be filed along
with the memorandum of appeal; and
 (n) Any other costs incidental to the suit or proceeding, including duty and
penalty paid on a document which was necessary to be paid or
compensatory costs awarded under Section 35-A of the Code and any
costs expressly allowed to be included, in the discretion of the Court.
 (2) Irrespective of the success or otherwise of a party, his costs in the cause
shall not be inclusive of costs paid or payable by him
 (a) under Section 35-A of the Code for causing delay;
 (b) for exhibiting interrogatories unreasonably, vexatiously or at improper
length as laid down in Order XI Rule 3 of the Code;
43
 (c) for unreasonably neglecting or refusing to produce a document after
notice as provided in Order XII Rule 2A (2) of the Code;
 (d) for securing adjournments under Order XVII Rule 1(2) of the Code;
 (e) under Order XIX Rule 3 (2) of the Code, being the cost of affidavit which
has unnecessarily set forth matters of hearsay or argumentative matter
or copies of, or extracts from, documents;
 (f) to the defendant, when the suit is taken out for being brought on behalf
of a minor without a proper next friend laid down in Rule 2 of Order
XXXII of the Code, or, the costs incurred by a next friend retiring under
Rule 8 or removed under Rule 9 of the said order;
 (g) towards the costs and allowances of the Officer acting as Court,
Guardian of a minor, when the amount is not expressly made taxable in
the cause by the order of the Court as provided in Order XXXII Rule 4
of the Code;
 (h) for obtaining copies or certified copies of depositions, or documents, or
in procuring photostats or photos of any documents with the
permission of the court;
 (i) towards any of the items referred to in sub-rule (1) and which the Court
directs that is shall not be included in the costs of the case, on account
of his conduct in the litigation.
 (3) If the court proposes to disallow any of the items mentioned in sub-rule
(1) or to grant other or further items of costs, the Court shall make a specific
direction in that regard in its Judgment or order.
 (4) In every suit or appeal filed or preferred by an indigent person, the Court
shall specifically state in its Judgment or order, who should pay the institution fee
payable to Government and on what property, if any, it shall be charged.]
100. 1[Advocate's fee]1 to be included in the costs awarded by Court to a
party in any suit or other proceeding shall be computed in the manner prescribed
hereunder:-
1. Substituted for the words "Pleader's fee" by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.
22.11.1984
3[
2[(a) In original suits, the fee shall be calculated on the value or the subject
matter of the suit, which shall be the same as that prescribed by the Karnataka
Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958, for determining the jurisdiction of the
Court, according to the following scales;
2. Clause (a) to (f) substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984
3. Clause (a) substituted by Notification No. LCA I/536/92 dated 6.1.1999, w.e.f. 28.1.1999
44
SUIT CLAIM
On the first sum of Rs.5,000/- 10 percent of the suit claim
On the sum exceeding Rs. 5,000/-
upto Rs.10,000/-
Rs. 500/- + 71/2 per cent on the amount
exceeding Rs. 5,000/-
Exceeding Rs. 10,000/- upto
Rs.20,000/-
Rs. 875/- + 51/2 per cent on the amount
exceeding Rs. 10,000/-
Exceeding Rs. 20,000/- upto
Rs.50,000/-
Rs.1,425/- + 4 percent on the amount
exceeding Rs. 20,000/-
Exceeding Rs. 50,000/- upto
Rs.1,00,000/-
Rs.2,625/- + 3 percent on the amount
exceeding Rs.50,000/-
Above Rs. 1,00,000/- Rs.4,125/- + 11/2 percent on the amount
which exceeds Rs.1,00,0001[xxx]1
Provided that the fee allowed in any suit shall not be less than 2[Rs.500/-]2
unless the Court orders otherwise.]2
1. Omitted by Notification No. LAW 135 LAC 2003 dated 30.7.2003, w.e.f. 25-12-2003
2. Substituted for the words and figures (Rs.250) by Notification No. LAW 135 LAC 2003 dated 30.7.2003, w.e.f.
25-12-2003
 (b) In a Regular Appeal, the fee shall be calculated according to the scale set
out in clause (a) above on the value or the amount of the subject matter
in dispute in Appeal:
 Provided that the fee allowed in any Regular Appeal shall not be less than
3[Rs. 500]1 unless the Court orders otherwise.
3. Substituted for the words and figures (Rs.350) by notification No. LAW 135 LAC 2003 dt 30.7.2003, w.e.f.
25.12.2003
 (c) In a small Cause Suit, the fee shall be 4[7] per cent of the value of the
amount of the claim as set forth in the plaint, subject to a minimum of Rs. 5[100].
4. Substituted for the figures "5" by Notification No. LCA I/536/92, dated 6.1.1999, w.e.f. 28.1.1999
5. Substituted for the figures "25" by Notification No. LCA I/536/92, dated 6.1.1999, w.e.f. 28.1.1999
6[(d) In the Execution Case, the fee shall be calculated as follows;-
 (i) On the first application at 50 per cent of the fee calculated at the rate
specified in clause (a) in respect of execution cases arising from Original
Suits and in clause (c) in respect of execution cases arising from Small
Cause Suits mentioned above, on the amount of money or value of the
relief claimed in the application.
 (ii) No fee shall be payable on any subsequent application unless it is
contested, in which case, the fee shall be calculated at 25 per cent of
the fee calculated at the rate specified in clauses (a) above in respect of
execution cases arising from Original Suits and at 12.5 percent at the
rate specified in clause (c) in respect of execution cases arising from
6. Clause (d) substituted by Notification No. LCA. I 313/91(2), dated 12.4.1993, W.E.F. 13.5.1993
45
 Small Causes Suits on the amount of money or value of the relief
claimed in the application on the amount of money or value of the relief
claimed in the application.]1
(e) In an Execution Appeal, the fee payable shall be one-fourth the fee
which would have been payable if the appeal were a regular Appeal.
1[
(f) In other proceedings, the fee shall be fixed by the Court regard being
had to the time occupied in the hearing of the case and the nature of
the questions raised, but subject to the minimum and maximum
prescribed hereunder. If, in any case coming under this clause the
Court awards costs without fixing the Advocate's Fee, the Court shall be
deemed to have awarded the minimum prescribed.]
1. Clause (f) substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/536/92, dated 6-1-1999 w.e.f. 28-1-1999
2[TABLE
Sl.
No.
(1)
Nature of Proceeding
(2)
Minimum
(3)
Maximum
(4)
(i) Land Acquisition cases and Motor Accidents
Claims Cases Note: If a group of cases is heard
together, the minimum shall be Rs.1,000/- and
maximum Rs.20,000/- for all of them together and
the court may apportion the fee for each case
separately
500 10,000
(ii) Matrimonial case 500 2,000
(iii) Guardians and Wards Case 500 2,000
(iv) Probate and Succession Case:
(a) If uncontested
(b) If contested
250
500
1,500
4,000
(v) Insolvency case:
(a) Contested Adjudication
(b) Determination of title and Priority
(c) Dispute relating to alienation
500
500
500
2,000
2,000
2,000
(vi) Arbitration cases 500 2,000
(vii) Cases under the Karnataka Rent Control Act 500 2,000
(viii) Any other original proceeding 500 2,000
(ix) Injunction Suits before Civil Judge (Junior
Division)
500 3,000
2.Substituted by Notification No. LAW 135/2003, dated 30-7-2003 w.e.f. 25.12.2003
46
(x) Injunction Suits before Civil Judge (Senior
Division)
750 5,000
(xi) Interlocutory matter 250 500
(xii) Miscellaneous Appeal or House Rent Control
Appeal or Revision or Revision Petition under any
other enactment.]2]
1
500 2,000]1
 (g) In all original matters and appeals where the jurisdictional value is
above Rs.10,000, the Court may in addition, allow the fee of one junior
pleader at 1/3 of the fee prescribed in the above Rules, provided the
junior pleader has been on record from the commencement of the
proceedings.
 (h) Fractions of a rupee in the amount or value of a claim shall be ignored
in calculating the fee payable thereon.
 (i) If several defendants or respondents who have a joint or common
interest succeed upon a joint defence, or upon separate defences
substantially the same, not more than one fee shall be allowed, unless
the Court otherwise orders for any reason, which shall be recorded in
the judgment. If only one fee be allowed, the Court shall direct to which
of the defendants or respondents it shall be paid, or shall apportion it
among the several defendants or respondents in such manner as it
thinks fit.
 (j) If several defendants or respondents who have separate interests set up
separate and distinct defences and succeed thereon, one fee for one
pleader, for each of the defendants or respondents who appears by a
separate pleader, may be allowed in respect of his separate interest.
Such fee, if allowed, shall be calculated with reference to the value of
the separate interest of such defendant or respondent, in the manner
hereinbefore prescribed.
 (k) In a suit for partition of joint family property or other joint property, a
suit for dissolution and accounts of a partnership, a suit for
administration or a suit of the like nature, in which the parties have a
distinct or distinguishable separate interest in the subject matter and
the Court decides to allow separate sets of costs to the different parties,
pleader's fee included in each such separate set of costs shall be
calculated with reference to the value of the separate interest of such
party in the manner hereinbefore prescribed. The same principle shall
be applied mutatis mutandis to an appeal arising from such a suit.
47
 (l) (i) Where, before any evidence is recorded, a suit or other original
proceeding is disposed of by consent, compromise or as not being
pressed, the fee shall be 50 per cent of the fee hereinbefore
prescribed.
 (ii) Where, before arguments on merits are heard an appeal is disposed
of by consent, compromise or as not being pressed, the fee shall be
50 per cent of the fee hereinbefore prescribed.
Explanation.- The expression 'arguments on merits' includes arguments on
questions of limitation or jurisdiction or as to maintainability of the appeal.
 (m) Where any suit or other original proceeding is decided ex-parte before
the defendant or the respondent enters appearance, the fee shall be 50 per cent of
the fee herein prescribed.
1[(n) Notwithstanding anything contained in schedule III to the Bombay
Pleaders Act (Bombay Act 17 of 1920), the fees contained in clause (a) to (m) shall
be pleaders fee to be included in the costs awarded by court to a party in a suit or
other proceeding ]1
1. Clause (n) Substituted by Notification No. LAW 135 LAC 2003, dt: 30.07.2003, w.e.f. 25-12-2003
48
CHAPTER XIV
DECREES
(Read with Order XX of the Code)
101. (1) Every decree shall ordinarily be drawn up not later than seven days
after the pronouncement of the judgment:
 Provided that where the decree has to be drawn up on a non-judicial stamp
paper, the period of seven days shall be reckoned from the date of production of the
stamp paper.
 (2) As soon as the decree is drawn up, it shall be notified in Form No.12 on
the Court Notice Board for the information of the pleaders concerned, who may
within three days thereafter (i.e., within 3 days from the date of affixing on the
Court Notice Board) scrutinise the decree and furnish to the decree writer a memo
of objections, if any. The decree shall, thereafter be signed by the Judge, after
hearing the pleaders if necessary and satisfying himself that the decree is drawn up
in accordance with the judgment.
 (3) At the foot of every decree signed by the Judge, a note shall be made
stating the date on which the decree was so signed by the Judge. In the order sheet
of the case, there shall also be made a similar note which shall be initialled and
dated by the Judge.
102. Form of Decree. (1) The decree shall, as far as possible, be in the
appropriate form prescribed in Appendix D to the First Schedule of the Code.
 (2) The decree shall agree with the judgment; it shall contain the number of
the suit, names and descriptions of the parties, their respective addresses for
service as originally set out in their pleadings or where they have been
subsequently changed, such modified addresses, and the particulars of the claim
and valuation thereof and shall specify clearly the relief granted or other
determination of the suit. Where the suit is not finally disposed of on the very day
on which it is taken for final disposal, all the dates on which such final hearing was
proceeded with whether by recording evidence or by hearing arguments, shall be
set out in the decree.
 (3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the suit and
by whom, and out of what property and in what proportion such costs are to be
paid.
49
 (4) The Court may direct that the costs payable to one party by the other
shall be set off against any sum which is admitted or found to be due from the
former to the latter.
 (5) In all cases in which an element of champerty or maintenance is proved,
the Court may provide in the final decree for costs on a special scale approximating
to the actual expenses reasonably incurred by the defendant.
103. Decree relating to immovables.- In every suit relating to immovable
property a schedule containing a description of the property (together with the
details of valuation as in Form No.1) shall be appended to the original decree,
whether the suit is dismissed or decreed and to an appellate decree whether the
appeal is allowed or dismissed.
(Read with Order XX, Rule 9 of the Code)
 104. Decree in a Pauper Suit or Appeal.- A copy of the decree in every
pauper suit or appeal shall be sent to the Deputy Commissioner of the District in
which the Court passing the decree is situated, immediately upon the decree being
drawn up and signed.
(Read with Order XXXIII of the Code)
105. Where two or more appeals are preferred against the same decree only
one common decree shall be drawn up in all such appeals unless the Appellate
Court otherwise directs.
50
CHAPTER XV
EXECUTION
(Read with Order XXI of the Code)
A. APPLICATION FOR TRANSFER
 106. Transfer of Decree for Execution.- (1) An application for transfer of a
decree to another Court for execution shall be made by a verified execution petition
in Form No. 13 and shall state the facts relied on by the applicant to bring the case
within the relevant provisions of Section 39 and Rules 4 and 5 of Order XXI of the
Code and shall specify the Court to which transfer of the decree is sought.
 (2) Notice of the application shall be issued in all cases in which under Rule
22 of Order XXI of the Code, notice of an application for execution is required to be
issued.
 (3) If the application is granted, the applicant shall, within seven days
thereafter, deposit in Court the process fee for the issue of an order in Form No. 3
of Appendix E to the First Schedule of the Code and for sending the decree. (The
Court sending the decree shall comply with the provisions of Rule 6 of Order XXI of
the Code).
 (4) The Court granting the application may, if prayed for by the applicant,
hand over to him or to his pleader, in a sealed cover, a copy of the order
transferring the decree together with the accompaniments mentioned in Rule 6 of
Order XXI of the Code to be taken to the Court to which they are to be sent.
 (5) Whenever any decree is sent for execution to a Court situated outside
the State of Karnataka, it shall, if not drawn up in English, be accompanied by an
English translation of the same.
107. (1) The Court to which a decree is sent for execution shall certify to the
Court which sent the decree, the fact of execution of such decree specifying the
nature and extent of satisfaction, or, where the former Court fails to execute the
decree, the circumstances attending such failure.
 (2) When once the transferee Court has certified as aforesaid, it shall refuse
to entertain a fresh application for execution of such decree.
 (3) The Court which originally passed the decree shall not, save for special
reasons, after transmission of such decree to another Court for execution, itself
grant execution without obtaining a certificate of non-satisfaction from the Court to
which such decree was transmitted. After the grant of such certificate the Court to
51
which the decree was transmitted shall refuse any further application for
execution.
B. STAY OF EXECUTION
 108. Stay of execution.- Prayer for stay of execution must be made by a
separate application with affidavit.
109. Report regarding Security.- (1) When the execution of a decree or
order has been stayed by an order of a Court of Appeal or Revision, on condition
that security shall be furnished within a specified time, the Court receiving the ad
interim order shall send intimation to that Court as soon as the security called for
has been furnished and accepted after notice to the opposite party and hearing his
objections, if any.
 (2) If no security has been furnished or accepted within the time allowed
therefor the fact shall be reported as soon as the time has expired.
C. ARREST AND DETENTION
(Read with Order XXI, Rule 37 to 40 of the Code)
110. Arrest of a Public or Railway servant, etc.- Before a warrant is
issued by a Civil Court for the arrest of a public servant (as defined in Section 21 of
the Indian Penal Code) or a railway, postal or telegraph official, resident in the
State, seven days' notice shall be given to the immediate official superior of the
person to be arrested.
Explanation.- In the case of a railway official the expression 'immediate
official superior' shall include a railway official of the rank of Station Master,
Foreman or Inspector, but not one of lower rank. In the case of a postal official the
said expression shall mean the Superintendent of Post Offices concerned. In the
case of a telegraph official the expression shall mean the Superintendent of
Telegraphs of the concerned Division.
111. Subsistence Allowance.- (1) On the judgment-debtor being brought
before the Court after arrest, if he does not express his intention to apply to be
declared an insolvent, the decree-holder shall be called upon to pay subsistence
allowance for the unexpired portion of the current month, and if he fails to do so,
the judgment-debtor shall be released.
 (2) If the period of detention is not to extend till the end of the month,
subsistence allowance need to be paid only for the number of days for which the
judgment-debtor is to be detained.
52
112. (1) The scale of subsistence allowance for a civil prisoner shall be as
follows:-
 (a) Rs. 1[15]1 per day for Class I (superior) prisoner.
 (b) Rs. 2[10]2 per day for Class II (ordinary) prisoner.
 (vide Government Order No. HD 89 PRB 62, dated 7th June 1962).
1. Substituted for the figures "2" by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984.
 2. Substituted for the figures "1-50" by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984.
 (2) For the purpose of subsistence allowance, the Court shall decide whether
any judgment-debtor belongs to the superior class or the ordinary class, regard
being had to his special status, education and mode of living.
113. Where the civil prison to which the judgment-debtor is committed, is
situated outside the jurisdiction of the Court to which the official escorting the
judgment-debtor is attached, the decree-holder, at whose instance the judgmentdebtor is committed to the civil prison shall pay into Court the traveling expenses
and batta of the escort in addition to the sum he shall be required to pay for the
subsistence and cost of conveyance of the judgment-debtor. Sub-rule (5) of Rule 39
of Order XXI of the Code shall apply to such payments also.
D. ATTACHMENT OF SALARY
 114. Where the property to be attached is the salary or allowances of a
servant of the Government or of a servant of a railway company or local authority,
3[or of a servant or a corporation engaged in any trade or industry, which is
established by a Central, Provincial or State Act or a Government Company as
defined in Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956]1 the attachment shall be
effected in accordance with Rule 48 of Order XXI of the Code.
3. Inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
(Read with Section 60 of the Code)
(For the officers to whom notices of attachment should be given, see Appendix D)
E. ATTACHMENT OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
115. (1) Information to be furnished by the Amin.- The Amin charged
with the attachment of immovable property shall at the time of attachment make
special enquiry as to:
 (a) the nature of the soil and of the cultivation,
 (b) whether the land is dry, wet or garden,
 (c) the number of wells or other means of irrigation,
53
 (d) the number and kind of trees,
 (e) the means of communication,
 (f) the vicinity of markets.
 (g) the estimated annual produce, and if leased, for how long, on what terms
and to whom,
 (h) in the case of a house, the material of which it is built, the extent of the
compound and its rental if any, and
 (i) the estimated value
and shall embody all the aforesaid information in the form of a written report to the
Court, attested by the Village Accountant, and not less than three respectable
inhabitants.
 (2) Attestation of Village Officers.- The Village Accountant of the village in
which the property attached is situated, shall render to the Amin every assistance
in preparing reports of the property attached, and attest such reports.
F. ATTACHMENT OF MOVABLE PROPERTY
 116. List of Movable Property.- When moveable property is attached in
execution of any civil process, the attaching officer shall give a copy of the list of the
attached property with description sufficient for identification, to the person from
whose possession the property is attached, or if he is not present then, to any adult
male member of the house-hold of such person, who is present, or if none is
present, shall affix it on the outer door of the house of such person and shall note
on the list dispatched or brought to the Court which has issued the process, the
mode in which the copy of the list has been delivered or affixed.
 117. (1) Custody of Property.- If the person, whose property is attached, or
from whose custody it is taken, gives security to the satisfaction of the Court, the
property may be handed over to him. Live-stock attached may, on similar terms, be
handed over to the attaching creditor, if after notice, the judgment-debtor or the
person from whose custody it was taken does not wish to provide for its
maintenance and custody.
(2) Custody of Fire-Arms, etc.- When the property attached is a fire-arm or
an explosive substance, it shall be sent at once to and left with a licensed dealer, or
sent to the officer-in-charge of the nearest Police Station, who shall hold it subject
to the further orders of the Court.
118. Failure to Pay Charges.- If the decree-holder who causes movable
property to be attached in execution fails to pay such charges as may be necessary
54
for the maintenance, custody or transport of the property or to take steps for
bringing the property to sale within the time fixed by the Court, the property shall
be released from attachment and restored to the judgment-debtor.
119. Withdrawal of Attachment.- The Court may, at any time during the
pendency of an attachment, direct the decree-holder to pay into Court, within a
time to be prescribed, such additional sum as may be necessary to cover the costs
for the attachment, transport, maintenance and custody of property and if such
payment is not made within the time prescribed, may withdraw the attachment.
120. Refund.- So much of the amounts deposited or paid into Court under
the above Rules as may not have been applied to the purposes indicated therein,
shall be refunded to the decree-holder.
121. (1) Cash, Jewels or Government Securities.- If the property attached
consists of cash, Government or other securities, jewels or other valuable articles of
small bulk, the Process Nazir shall keep the same together with a descriptive list in
a box (other than the ordinary cash chest of the Court) under lock and seal and
send the box for safe custody to the nearest Government treasury under the orders
of the Presiding Officer.
Note.- The descriptive list referred to herein shall be in addition to entries
made in Register No. XXXII.
 (2) In other cases attached property brought to the Court shall be retained
by the Nazir in the Court-house, if it can be conveniently stored or kept there.
122. Curator.- In order to provide for the custody of property which cannot
be conveniently stored or kept in the Court-house, the District Judge may appoint
for any Court or group of Courts a Curator who shall furnish security, in any form
applicable to a Government servant, for an amount to be fixed in each case by the
District Judge.
123. The Nazir or Curator, as the case may be, shall be responsible for the
due custody and preservation of all property entrusted to him until he delivers it up
under the order of the Court.
124. Every Nazir and every Curator shall maintain a Register of attached
movables and live-stock in Register No. XXXII.
125. The Curator (or other person) shall receive such reasonable sums as
the Court may order for his remuneration and expenses incurred for the custody
and preservation of attached moveables which cannot be conveniently stored in the
Court-house.
126. Custody of Live-stock.- If there be a pound, commodious and
sheltered, within easy reach of the attaching Court, the attached live-stock may be
kept there under the responsibility of the Nazir or Curator and the pound-keeper
55
shall receive the fee prescribed. The sum so paid shall be met from the amount
deposited by the party at whose instance the attachment is made.
127. Maintenance Charges.- The rates for the maintenance (exclusive of the
custody) of attached live-stock shall be as follows:
 (a) For full-grown cattle and horse 1[five rupees]1 per head per day.
 (b) For calves, donkeys, sheep, goats and dogs 2[two rupees]2 per head
per day.
 (c) In the case of other animals such sum as the Court may fix:
 Provided that whenever live-stock is to be kept in a pound, the charges shall
be at the rates prescribed for the pound.
1 Substituted for the words "one rupee" by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.
22.11.1984
2 Substituted for the words "fifty paise" by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.
22.11.1984
128. Maintenance charges sufficient for a week shall be paid to the Nazir or
Curator in advance by the attaching creditor and in the case of the live-stock being
sold the amount spent for maintenance shall be deducted from the proceeds of
sale. If the live-stock is released from attachment under Rule 60 of Order XXI of the
Code, the amount spent for maintenance shall be paid by the person on whose
application the live-stock is released.
G. PROCLAMATION OF SALE
(Read with Order XXI, Rules 66 and 67 of the Code)
129. An applicant for sale of immovable property shall along with the
statement required under sub-rule (3) of Rule 66 of Order XXI of the Code, also file
one or more affidavits stating the interest of the judgment-debtor in the property
proposed to be sold and whether any person other than the judgment-debtor has
any, and if so, what interest therein:
 Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit, require an applicant to produce
a certificate from the office of the Registrar of Assurances (Sub-Registrar) of the
District, showing whether the property is subject to any encumbrance.
130. The Court may require the judgment-debtor to produce any title deeds
relating to the property, which may be in his possession or power and may retain
such documents till the property is sold or released from attachment. It shall
deliver to purchaser, along with the sale certificate such of the documents as relate
solely to the property sold and, on his demand and at his cost, shall give him
copies of such of them as relate to the property sold as well as other property. All
56
documents, which may not under this Rule be delivered to the purchaser, shall be
returned to the person by whom or on whose behalf they have been produced.
 When any encumbrance on the property is to be discharged from out of the
sale proceeds, the Court shall have like power to direct the production of title deeds
by the encumbrancer and to deliver the same to the purchaser or as the case may
be to furnish the purchaser with copies thereof at his cost and to return the
original documents to the encumbrancer.
131. The Court shall give notice by affixture on the notice board, of the date
on which it proposes to hold an enquiry under Rule 66 of Order XXI of the Code
and may summon any person likely to afford material information, to attend and
give evidence and produce any documents relating to the property, which may be in
his possession or power. Such documents shall be returned after inspection, the
Court, if it thinks necessary retaining copies thereof prepared at the applicant's
expense.
132. All costs of the enquiry shall be paid in advance by the applicant. They
shall be treated as costs in the execution proceedings and may be apportioned as
the Court directs.
133. The enquiry shall be completed as soon as possible and the
proclamation of sale shall be prepared in Form No. 29 in Appendix E to the First
Schedule of the Code.
134. When a copy of the proclamation is sent to the Deputy Commissioner
(under Rule 67 read with Rule 54(2) of Order XXI of the Code) a duplicate shall also
be sent to the Tahsildar of each Taluk in which any portion of the property is
situated, for being exhibited in a conspicuous place in his office.
135. If after the proclamation has been drawn up any matter is brought to
the notice of the Court which it considers material for purchasers to know, it shall
cause the same to be notified when the property is put up for sale.
136. So much of the foregoing Rules as may be applicable, shall be followed
in the case of an application to sell moveable property attached by prohibitory
order, so that the description of such property may be as complete as possible.
 In the case of other moveables, the Court may make such enquiries as it
thinks proper, but shall not be bound to do so unless application is made to raise
the attachment or to declare a lien.
57
H. SALE
(Read with Sections 65 to 67 and Order XXI, Rules 64 to 96 of the Code)
137. It shall not be necessary to sell at the same time or place moveable and
immovable property attached in execution of the same decree.
138. Sale of immovable property shall ordinarily take place at the spot,
subject to the condition that the final bid shall be offered before the Presiding
Officer at the Court house.
139. The proclamation of sale itself shall specify not only the date of sale at
the spot but also the date on which the final bid shall be offered before the
Presiding Officer:
 Provided that, either at the request of both the parties or for reasons to be
recorded in writing, the Presiding Officer may direct that the sale of any immovable
property shall take place in the precincts of the Court.
140. In all cases where sales are adjourned and no fresh proclamations have
to be issued, the adjourned date and hour shall be notified for the information of
the public in the following manner.-
 (a) When the sale is held in the precincts of the Court, a notice shall be
put up on the notice board of the Court notifying the adjourned date
and hour of the sale.
 (b) When the sale is held at any place outside the precincts of the court a
notice notifying the adjourned date and hour shall be affixed, if the
property to be sold is immovable, on some conscious part of the
property itself, and if the property is moveable, on some conspicuous
part of the place in which it is kept.
 (c) When the proclamation of sale has been published either in the
Official Gazette or in any local newspaper under Rule 67(2) of Order
XXI of the Code, the place, date and time of the adjourned sale shall
whenever practicable, be published in the same manner.
141. Immediate or early sale of moveable property.- If moveable property
is in the custody of the Nazir or Curator, and it appears to the court that immediate
sale thereof is necessary, the Court may authorise him to sell the same by public
auction and may give such directions as to the date, time and place of sale and the
manner of publishing the same as the circumstances of the particular case may
require.
58
(Read with Order XXI, Rules 43 and 68 of the Code)
142. Place of sale of agricultural produce, etc.- Unless the Court
otherwise orders, all sales of live-stock, agricultural produce, articles of local
manufacture and other articles commonly sold at village markets, which have not
been brought to Court, shall be held at such market in the neighbourhood of the
place where the goods were attached, as may appear to be for the greatest
advantage of the judgement-debtor, regard being had to the prospect of the good
prices and the saving of expenses of transport.
143. Articles of small value.- If the total value of the property attached is in
the opinion of the Court less than Rs. 25, it may be sold after notifying on the
notice board of the Court the date and time of sale, and the sale proceeds, after
defraying the expenses, shall be treated as attached property.
144. Charges for Custody.- In cases in which expenses are incurred for the
care and custody of the attached moveable property, such expenditure shall not be
allowed for a period longer than thirty days, provided, however, that it shall in no
case exceed the value of the property. The person incharge may, however, in the
case of postponement of sale, apply to the Court at the end of every period of thirty
days for an order for payment of such expenditure. Where postponement of sale is
occasioned by the intervention of a claim to attached property, the expenses
incurred during the period of postponement shall be borne by the claimant, if he
fails to establish his claim, and by the attaching creditor, if such claim is allowed.
145. Application by Surety for Sale or Discharge.- When attached
moveable property is left in the custody of a surety, the surety may apply for its
sale, or for his being discharged from liability. The Court shall thereupon direct
notice of such application to issue to the parties, at the surety's cost and if the
parties interested do not take steps to get the property sold or released within the
time fixed, it may be sold and the proceeds shall be deposited in Court, after paying
the surety the cost properly incurred by him in issuing the notice and in taking
care of the property.
146. Realisation of property attached by seizure.- When the attachment
of property other than live-stock is made by actual seizure, the Court shall, if
within one month from the date of attachment the property has not been sold or
the attachment has not been removed, of its own motion direct the property to be
sold by an officer of the Court; and the proceeds of the sale, after payment of the
expenses of the sale and the prescribed fees, shall be brought into Court to the
credit of the suit or proceeding in which the attachment was made.
59
147. When cattle or other live-stock are in the custody of a surety or the
attaching creditor, the Court may, in its discretion, disallow wholly or in part the
remuneration due to him for keeping and feeding them, if he uses them in any
profitable manner or otherwise derives any benefit therefrom.
I. SALE PROCEEDINGS
148. Each Court shall set apart one week-day for holding sales in execution
of decrees. Such day shall be notified on the notice board of the Court in English
and Kannada and in such other language as the Court may direct:
 Provided that the Court may, whenever it thinks fit, direct that any
execution sale be held on any other day:
 Provided further that no such sale shall be held on a holiday.
Note.- For adjournment of sale see Order XXI, Rule 69 of the Code.
149. Whenever an application for leave to bid is made under Rule 72 of
Order XXI of the Code, it shall be competent for the Court to give leave to bid at the
sale only on condition that the applicant's bid shall not be less than such amount
as the Court may fix, which shall, as far as practicable, be determined with
reference to the probable market value of the property, or of the lot or lots into
which the property is divided for sale.
 150. Whenever guns or other arms in respect of which licences have to be
obtained by purchasers under the Arms Act (54 of 1959), are sold by public auction
in execution of decrees, the Court directing the sale shall give due notice to the
District Magistrate concerned of the names and addresses of the purchasers and of
the time and place of the intended delivery to the purchasers of such arms so that
proper steps may be taken by the police to enforce the requirements of the said Act.
151. Whenever necessary the Court may make a vesting order as provided in
Rule 81 of Order XXI of the Code.
152. Sale Certificate.- All sale certificates of immovable property shall be
engrossed upon stamp papers of proper value and the copies thereof shall be
forwarded to the registering officer under Section 89 of the Indian Registration Act
(XVI of 1908) within three days of the issue of the certificate.
60
 The copy sent to the registering officer shall disclose the stamp value of the
document as well as the stamp vendor's endorsement in extenso.
 The sale certificate shall be drawn up not later than 10 days from the date of
the production of the requisite stamp paper and the certificate ready for delivery
shall be notified on the notice board of the Court within 24 hours of its signature
by the Judge.
CHAPTER XVI
REFERENCES
(Read with Section 113 and Order XLVI of the Code)
153. When any Civil Court refers a case for the decision of the High Court
under Rule 1 of Order XLVI of the Code or under the Stamp Act or the Land
Revenue Act or under any other law, the Reference shall be in the form of a
statement of the case containing the number and particulars of the suit, appeal or
other proceeding out of which the Reference arises, and the names and addresses
of all the parties interested in or likely to be affected by the Reference, and setting
out the facts of the case and the points or questions on which the opinion, order or
direction of the High Court is sought, together with the opinion of the Presiding
Officer of the Court. The Reference shall be accompanied by such records and
papers, as are in the opinion of the referring officer, relevant for a full consideration
of the Reference, with two copies of the statement of the case.
154. When the Reference is made on the application of a party, the Court
shall require the applicant to produce stamps necessary for service of notice on
himself and all other parties concerned; when it is made suo motu by the Court, it
shall require each party to produce stamps required for service on himself. The
Court shall transmit such court-fee stamps with the statement of the case.
61
CHAPTER XVII
ORDER SHEET
 155. Order sheet in Form No. 14 shall be maintained in respect of each suit,
appeal or other proceeding in all Courts in the manner provided in this Chapter.
The pages of the order sheet, used in each proceeding, shall be serially numbered.
Each page of the order sheet shall also bear the number of the suit, appeal or other
proceeding as the case may be.
156. (1) The order sheet shall be the record of the proceedings of the Court
in each case. All entries made therein shall be initialled by the Presiding Officer,
who shall also date the same.
 (2) The order sheet shall also disclose the presence or absence of the parties
or pleaders representing them on each day of the hearing and the number of
witnesses present and the number examined.
 (3) All orders made by the Court, including orders interlocutory, incidental
and auxiliary matters, shall be recorded by the Presiding Officer in his own hand in
the order sheet:
 Provided that, when the order is likely to be lengthy, it may be prepared and
filed separately, the result only being entered in the order sheet at the time of
pronouncing the order 1[and all such orders passed shall be filed and kept in the
record in the chronological order and necessary entries be made in the general
running index.]1
1. Added by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1982, w.e.f. 22.11.1984
157. Any order recorded in the order sheet, when it relates to an
Interlocutory Application, shall disclose clearly the serial number of such
application.
158. Payment of money in Court.- Whenever any party to a proceeding is
ready to pay money to any other party in Court on any date of hearing, such
amount may be paid in Court to such other party or to his pleader duly authorised
to receive payment in the presence of the Presiding Officer, who should note the
payment in the order sheet then and there, and obtain the signature of the person
receiving the amount.
62
CHAPTER XVIII
INSPECTION AND SEARCH OF RECORDS
159. Any party or his pleader in a case may, on an application in writing
either verified or supported by an affidavit stating the reasons therefor, be
permitted to inspect or search the records of the case. The inspection or search
shall be allowed under and in accordance with the orders of the Presiding Officer of
the Court on the application.
160. When inspection or search is ordered under the last preceding Rule, no
fee in addition to the court-fee paid on the application, shall be required for the
first hour of inspection or search. For every subsequent hour or part thereof, a fee
of one rupee shall be paid by affixing court-fee label or labels to the application.
161. Records of the case shall not be taken out of the premises of the Court
for purposes of search or inspection. All such search and inspection shall be
conducted in the presence of a responsible official of the Court, designated for the
purpose by the Presiding Officer in each case, or the Chief Ministerial Officer.
162. The Chief Ministerial Officer may permit any pleader or his registered
clerk upon oral request without payment of any charge to inspect any of the
registers maintained in the Court for recording the progress of cases.
163. When inspection or search is allowed or permitted the party or his
pleader to whom such permission is granted may read the document or part of the
document in respect of which inspection or search is allowed or may have it read to
him and may make a short memorandum of the date and nature of the document,
but he shall not be entitled to make a full copy of the document or verbatim extract
therefrom. If he requires copies, he must apply for them as provided for in Chapter
XXIII.
164. Subject to the provisions of Rule 15 of Order XI of the Code no party or
person shall be entitled to inspect or search any document or paper of which
certified copies cannot be granted under Chapter XXIII.
63
CHAPTER XIX
ARGUMENTS
165. Notes of Arguments.- In all cases in which an appeal lies, the
Presiding Officer of the Court shall record in English, the points urged in the
course of arguments addressed in the case and the notes so made shall form part
of the record.
64
1[CHAPTER XIX-A
PREPARATION OF PAPER BOOKS IN APPEALS
 165-A. (1) Except in cases referred to in sub-rules (2) and (3) of this rule,
there shall be prepared in every appeal, a paper book as hereinafter provided.
 (2) No paper book need be prepared in miscellaneous Appeals against
interlocutory orders.
 (3) The appellate Court may, in any appeal, either suo motu in the interest of
speedy disposal of appeal, or on an application made by the appellant, dispense
with the preparation of the paper book.
165-B. (1) In Regular Appeals, the paper book shall consist of the plaint,
written statement, reply if any, oral evidence, the judgment and decree of the trial
Court and sketches of immovable property, if any, forming part of the record:
 Provided that the appellant may file legible or typed copies or typed English
translations of the plaint, written statement and reply if they are in Kannada, and
English translations of the same if they are in any other Indian languages.
 (2) In House Rent Control Appeals and Miscellaneous Appeals, the paper
book shall consist of the principal pleadings corresponding to the plaint and
written statement and reply, if any, oral evidence, judgment and formal order, if
any, of the trial Court.
 (3) In Execution Appeals, the paper book shall consist of the decree under
execution, the execution application, objections of the judgment debtor, if any, oral
evidence if any, and the order of the executing Court appealed from. If the order
appealed from was passed in an interlocutory application, the said application,
affidavits and counters therein shall also be included.
 (4) The order sheet of the trial Court or the executing Court, as the case may
be, need not be included in the paper book, unless the appellant asks for its
inclusion.
165-C. In every appeal where the paper book is required under these rules,
there shall be prepared one copy for the use of the Court, one for the appellant and
one for the respondent; where there are more respondents than one, there shall be
prepared for the respondents as many copies as there are advocates representing
the respondents, each set of respondents represented by one advocate being
entitled to only one copy. A respondent appearing in person shall be entitled to a
copy.
1.Chapter XIX-A (Rules 165-A to 165-K) inserted by Notification No. ROC 3346/68, dated 4.12.1969, w.e.f.
18.12.1969

65
165-D. The paper books shall be typewritten. They shall be prepared on
substantial white foolscap folio paper with an outer margin of about 3.8 cms. and
inner margin of about 2.5 cms. The book shall be provided with an index; separate
sheets shall be stitched together bookwise and pages numbered consecutively.
Typing shall be done in double space on both sides of the paper. Every tenth line of
each page shall be numbered.
 165-E. Unless the appellant himself undertakes to prepare and file into
Court sufficient number of copies of the paper book as required by these rules, the
preparation of the paper book including sketches of immovable properties, if any,
shall be done by the office of the Court under the supervision of the Chief
Ministerial Officer of the Court.
 165-F. The expenses of preparation of the paper book shall be borne by the
appellant himself. Such expenses calculated as hereinafter provided shall form part
of the appellant's costs in the appeal.
165-G. Except in cases where the appellant himself undertakes to prepare
the paper books and also except in cases where the preparation of the paper book
is not required by these rules or is dispensed with by Court, the appellant shall
within two weeks from the date of the presentation of the appeal, deposit into Court
a sum of Rs. 25 towards the expenses of preparation of the paper book by the
Court. If the charges or expenses are estimated to exceed the said amount, the
excess as estimated shall be paid by the appellant within fifteen days of receipt of
the notice intimating the amount to be paid. Preparation of the paper book shall
not be commenced unless the estimated amount is paid. If, after preparation the
actual charges exceed the aggregate charges already paid by the appellant, he shall
pay the balance amount within fifteen days of receipt of the notice intimating the
amount. Such notice shall be served on the appellant or his advocate. If the actual
expenses are less than the aggregate charges already paid, the unutilised balance
shall be refunded to the appellant.
165-H. Charges for preparation of the paper book shall be calculated at the
following rates:-
 First copy of the running matter .. 25 paise per page
 Each additional copy .. 5 paise per page
where tabular statements are to be prepared, the rate shall be 30 paise per page of
the principal copy and 8 paise per page of each additional copy.
66
165.I. If the appellant fails to make the initial deposit of Rs. 25 within the
period specified in Rule 166-G or to pay the balance of the estimated charges
within the period limited therefor, or to file into Court sufficient number of copies of
the paper book, where he undertake to prepare it himself, within one month of the
admission of the appeal, the appeal shall be placed before the Court for orders; the
Court may either extend time or give such other directions as it considers proper in
the circumstances or dismiss the appeal for non-prosecution. If any appeal is
dismissed under this rule, the Court may restore the same on an application made
within one month from the date of dismissal accompanied by a certificate issued by
the Chief Ministerial Officer that the default for which dismissal had been ordered
has been made good.
165-J. The Advocate appearing for the appellant shall be personally
responsible for the payment of any money remaining to be paid by the appellant in
respect of the paper book actually prepared by the Court.
165-K. The charges for preparation of paper books shall be treated as one of
the items of cash expenses for the time being in force shall apply to the charges for
preparation of paper books also. Immediately after the paper books are prepared by
the office of the Court, the exact amount of charges according to the prescribed
rates shall be calculated and the said amount shall be finally credited to the
Government under the proper head without any delay. The balance, if any, shall be
refunded to the concerned party.]
67
CHAPTER XX
RECORDS
A. CENTRAL RECORD ROOM
166. There shall be one record room styled the "Central Record Room" for
all the Civil Courts in each District under the charge of the Record Keeper attached
to the District Court:
 Provided that the High Court may direct that there may be one Central
Record Room for a group of Districts to be in charge of the Record Keeper of the
District Court of such District as it may specify.
167. The Central Record Keeper shall be responsible for the safe custody
and preservation of the records received in the Record Room.
168. The Record Room shall not be used for any purpose other than the
preservation of the records, and shall be securely guarded.
169. Arrangement of Records.- The racks in which the records are
arranged shall be divided into compartments, over each of which shall neatly
written the name of the Court to which the records contained therein belong, the
nature of the records and the year of disposal.
170. The records shall be arranged in the compartments according to dates
of disposal, each record being stitched in book form, and shall be tied up in kora
(unbleached white), white or yellow cloth.
171. Before depositing the files in the compartments, the Central Record
Keeper shall ensure that the records have been properly arranged and append a
label to that effect to each file.
172. The Central Record Keeper shall check whether all the court-fee labels
in each file have been properly punched and shall punch the labels a second time
with the triangular punch provided for that purpose.
Note.- When in the course of checking, the Central Record Keeper finds that
any court-fee label has remained unpunched, he shall, before punching it with the
triangular punch, bring to the notice of the District Judge in charge of the Central
Record Room, the fact of the Court-fee label having escaped being punched in the
Court concerned before being acted upon. He shall then, in the presence of the
District Judge, cancel the court-fee label by punching it with the round punch as
well as the triangular punch and shall communicate to the Court from which the
record had been received the fact of the court-fee label having remained unpunched
at the time it was received in the Central Record Room.
 The District Judge may issue such instructions as he may consider
necessary to prevent recurrence of such instances.
68
B. MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS IN THE COURTS CONCERNED
173. In all Courts subordinate to the District Court, one clerk shall be
appointed as Record Keeper; the records of all disposed off cases shall be in his sole
custody, until they are sent to the Central Record Room.
 He shall arrange the paper in the same way as provided for by the Rules
relating to the Central Record Room.
 The record of each case shall contain a list (Ferist) of all the papers therein.
174. The records shall be under lock and key shall be in the custody of the
Record Keeper, who shall be personally responsible for its safe keeping.
175. Requisitions.- When the record of any case is required for reference, a
slip containing the name of the official taking the record and the date of taking
shall be left in its place and the signature of the person taking it shall be taken in
the register maintained for the purpose, in which the return also shall be noted.
Note.- Before signing the above register it shall be the duty of the official to
compare the papers in the record with the ferist.
176. The record of current cases shall be in the sole custody of the clerk or
official who has charge of the same according to the arrangement of the work of the
Court.
177. No clerk or other subordinate officer of any Court shall take any record
out of the Court-house. Records taken out of the Record Room shall be kept
securely locked every evening in the Court-house in the custody of the clerk
responsible for them.
178. When each case is completed, the record shall be handed over to the
Record Keeper. An entry of the same shall be made in the Record Keeper's book
and such entry shall be signed by the Record Keeper.
C. CLASSIFICATION OF RECORDS
179. The records of judicial proceedings, whether suits or cases, shall be
divided into three classes :-
 (a) Class I including records of-
 (i) Suits for or affecting immovable property, including suits for
foreclosure, sale or redemption;
 (ii) suits for a declaration of a right to maintenance with or without a
charge on immovable property or to determine the rate thereof ;
(iii) suits in respect of succession to an office, or to declare the validity
or invalidity of an adoption, or otherwise to determine the status of
an individual;
69
(iv) suits relating to public trusts, charities, endowments, rights or
customs;
(v) contested and uncontested suits and cases for Probate and Letters
for Administration and for revocation of the same;
(vi) cases relating to the guardianship of minors and administration of
their property;
(vii) cases relating to guardianship of lunatics and care of their estates;
 (Note.- An application by an executor, administrator or by the guardian of a
minor or lunatic to sell, mortgage, etc., property belonging to the estate is an
application in the case and must form part of the record of the case together with
all the proceedings connected with it).
(viii) Other cases under Indian Succession Act ;
(ix) Insolvency Cases ;
(x) Matrimonial Cases ;
 (b) Class II including records of all suits and original proceedings which do
not come under Class I.
 (c) Class III including records of proceedings in execution of decrees or
orders.
D. ARRANGEMENTS OF RECORDS
180. Every record under Class I shall consists of three files to be styled and
marked respectively, File A, File B, and File C.
181. File A shall contain the undermentioned papers which shall be
arranged in the following order :-
 (a) Table of Contents (Form No. 15) ;
 (b) The Order Sheet (Form No. 14);
 (c) The plaint or petition together with any schedule annexed thereto ;
 (d) Any process served upon the defendant together with the return of
service in cases decreed ex parte ;
 (e) Written Statements;
 (f) Memorandum of issues;
70
 (g) Any award of arbitrators or petition of compromise, if given effect to
by the decree or final order; also the report together with the map (if
any) of a Commissioner in matters relating to immovable property if
referred to or given effect to but not any portion of the evidence taken
by such Commissioner; also in the case of minors or lunatics any
order of the Court sanctioning a compromise as beneficial to the
minor or lunatic;
 (h) Any order for administration or for partition or for accounts or
inquiry, with the directions given and the judgment upon which such
order is founded;
 (i) Judgment of final order;
 (j) Preliminary decree (if any) and final decree;
 (k) Copy of any judgment and decree passed in appeal or revision;
 (l) 1[Copies of] wills in Probate and Succession Cases;
1. Substituted for the word ‘Original’ by Notification No. ROC 2062 of 68, dated 1-5-1969, w.e.f. 8-5-1969
 (m) Any other paper which the Presiding Judge may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, order to be placed in File A.
 182. File B shall contain:-
 (a) Table of Contents;
 (b) Lists of documents admitted in evidence;
 (c) All the evidence oral and documentary upon which the subject matter
of the suit is decided;
 (d) All applications and papers not specified as included in any other file.
183. File C shall contain:-
 (a) Table of contents;
 (b) All summonses, processes, returns thereto, lists of witnesses,
petitions relating to the attendance of witnesses of adjournments
proceedings calling for or sending papers or records and affidavits
relating to matters mentioned in this Rule and all other miscellaneous
papers not included in Files A or B.
71
184. (1) Other documents which have been produced by parties, but have
either not been tendered in evidence, or having been tendered in
evidence, been rejected, shall be kept apart from the record of the suit
or other proceeding to which they belong and shall, if not reclaimed
by the parties who produced them, be retained in the Court in which
they were produced, for a period of one year from the date of the final
order of the Court in the suit or proceeding in which the documents
were produced, and shall, on the expiration of that period, be
destroyed one month after publication of the notice hereinafter
prescribed.
1[(2) A notice containing complete lists of such unfiled documents (i.e.,
documents not included in any file) ready for destruction and the date on which
they are to be destroyed, if not reclaimed earlier, shall be affixed to the Notice
Board of the Court. The correctness of the lists shall be certified by the Record
Keeper or the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court].
1. Sub-Rule (2) substituted by Notification No. ROC 1318/1969, dated 21-2-1970, w.e.f. 5-3-1970
185. Every record under Class II shall consist of two files, unless the
Presiding Judge in any case or class of cases directs that it shall consist of one
only. If there is one file, it shall be marked File B. If there are two files, they shall be
marked as Files B and C and File B shall contain the papers specified as included
in File A and B of Class I, and File C shall contain the papers specified as included
in File C of Class I.
Note.- In deciding whether there shall be one or two files, the Judge shall
have regard to the nature of the case and size of the record.
186. The papers in File B of Class II shall be arranged in the following
manner.-
 The papers which ought to be included in File A, if the case were of Class I,
shall be placed in the order prescribed for Class A; then the papers which ought to
be included in File B. The papers which ought to be included in File C shall, if File
C is not prepared, be put last of all.
187. Every record under Class III shall, except in cases specified below,
consist of one file to be styled and marked File B, which shall contain all the papers
relating to the case. If the application is to execute a decree in a suit included in
Class I and a question is determined as to the construction of the decree, or its
effect as regards all or any of the parties thereto, or if possession is given of
immovable property in pursuance of the decree, the record shall, as soon as the
application is finally disposed of be divided into two files, to be styled and marked
respectively, File A and File B.
72
 In that case, File A shall contain:
 (a) Table of Contents.
 (b) Order Sheet.
 (c) When a question as to the construction, effect or scope of the decree
is raised and determined,
 (i) application for execution;
 (ii) petition raising any question as to the construction or effect of
the decree and any counter petition;
 (iii) order of the Court on such question;
 (iv) copy of any judgment passed in an appeal or revision.
 (d) When possession of immovable property is given in pursuance of the
decree, Nazir's return of delivery of possession.
 File B shall contain all other papers.
188. The records of an Appellate Court shall be arranged in the same way,
as that of the Court of original jurisdiction, except that there shall be no File C, the
papers which ought to be included in the File C being attached to File B. Copies of
judgment and decree, filed with the memorandum of appeal, shall be placed in File
B. These Copies shall be returned to the appellant on his applying for them, after
the disposal of the appeal.
 The files shall be marked A and B as in the Court of first instance, according
to the nature of the suit or case.
189. Pleadings, applications and proceedings in every suit or case, shall, as
for as possible, be placed in the file to which they belong as the trial proceeds and
shall be arranged in the order in which they are brought before the Court.
 To preserve the decree in tact, a cartridge paper or other thick paper should
be placed after the decree while stitching the records.
190. Depositions of the witnesses shall be arranged in the order of the
serial numbers of the witnesses.
191. Distribution of the papers into proper files shall, in all cases, be made
before the record is despatched to the Central Record Room.
192. Table of Contents, which is the first paper in each file, shall be in
Form No. 15. A specimen of entries to be made therein is given below:
73
 Suit (or case) No ..............................................of ....................................
 Class ....................................................File.............................................
Sl. No. of
Paper
Sheets Description Remarks
1 2 3 4
1 1-3 Order sheet
2 4-5 Plaint
3 6-8 Written Statement
4 9 Memorandum of issues
5 10-12 Judgment
6 13-14 Decree
 Exhibits need not be described in the table of contents. The lists attached to
them shall alone be shown in the table with the serial and sheet numbers. A
specimen of entries to be made in this connection is given below:
Sl. No. of
Paper
Sheets Description Remarks
1 2 3 4
1 * *
2 * *
3 * *
4 9 List of documents admitted
in evidence for the plaintiff
5 10-25 Exhibits for the plaintiff
6 26 List of documents admitted
in evidence for the Defendant
7 27-34 Exhibits for defendant
8 * *
193. Title Page.- To each file of every record there shall be prefixed a title
page in Form No. 16. Sufficiently thick paper shall be used for the Title Page.
194. The Title Pages shall be of different colours. The title page of File A
shall be white. The title page of File B shall be brown. The title page of File C shall
be yellow.
74
E. CUSTODY OF RECORDS
195. The records of all categories of cases disposed of shall be retained in
the Courts concerned for a period of one year, and thereafter despatched to the
Central Record Room.
196. In every Court, during the first week of every calendar month, the
records of cases disposed of during the immediately preceding calendar month
shall be arranged according to the above rules and left in the custody of the Record
Keeper of the Court.
 The Record Keeper shall despatch the records of cases, so arranged in a
particular calendar month, to the Central Record Room, during the corresponding
month of the succeeding year, so as to reach the Central Record Room before the
end of the month.
Exceptions.- 1. When a guardian is appointed by a Court under the
Guardian's and Wards Act for a minor's property, the records of the case shall be
retained by the Court till the minor attains majority and the guardian is
discharged.
 2. When a guardian or a curator is appointed for a lunatics, the records of
the case shall be retained in the Court till the guardian or curator is discharged.
 3. In Probate and Administration Cases the records shall be retained in the
Court granting the Probate or Letters of Administration, until the executor or the
administrator, as the case may be, has filed his final account of the administration
of the estate.
197. Each monthly bundle of records despatched to the Central Record
Room shall be accompanied by lists showing the disposal of cases of each category.
The particulars of all cases disposed of must be entered in the lists and when, for
any reason, a record is kept back, a note to that effect shall be made in the column
of remarks.
 The lists shall be in Form No. 17. When the record or records kept back are
subsequently sent to the Central Record Room, such record or records shall also be
accompanied by a list in the same Form, care being taken to see that the serial
number of disposal given to each record is the same as in Register No. XIII.
198. On receipt of the records in the Central Record Room, the Record
Keeper shall verify that the records correspond with those entered in the lists, that
the contents of each file correspond with table of contents, that the papers bear the
court-fee stamps shown in such table and that stamps have been duly cancelled.
75
199. The Record Keeper shall bring to the notice of the District Judge any
irregularities that may have occurred in connection with the arrangement or
despatch of records or in regard to the cancellation of stamps.
 200. Before any record is despatched out of the Central Record Room for
any purpose, the Record Keeper shall make an entry relating thereto, in Register
No. XVI. On the return of the record, the Record Keeper shall note in the same
Register the date of the return.
 After making the entries in Register No. XVI, the requisition or the letter
calling for the record shall be placed in the place of the record sent.
 When more records than one have been called for under one requisition,
slips of paper shall be kept in the places of records sent, after noting in those slips
the necessary references as to the number and date of the requisitions, brief
description of the record and the date of despatch.
201. Registers which are to be permanently retained, shall be retained for
fifteen years after they are closed and shall then be sent to the Central Record
Room. All other registers shall be retained in the Court to which they belong, until
they become due for destruction, when they may be sent to the Central Record
Room.
 A catalogue of permanent registers shall be kept in each Central Record
Room showing:
 (a) the nature of the registers and the year or years to which they relate;
 (b) the number of volumes; and
 (c) the names of the Courts to which the registers pertain.
F. PRESERVATION AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
 202. File A shall be preserved permanently. File B shall be destroyed at the
end of 1[6 years]. File C shall be destroyed at the end of 3 years:
1. Substituted for figure and words “12 years” by Notification No. LCA1/107/1986, dated 22.02.1993, w.e.f. 04.03.1993
 Provided that, documents and records produced in Courts by Government
officials or sent for under Rule 10 of Order XIII of the Code, shall not be destroyed,
but, shall be transmitted to the Court or office from which they have been
summoned.
203. The period of retention shall be calculated, as regards suits or cases of
Classes I and II, from the date of the final decree or order, which in cases appealed
against shall be that of the Appellate Court.
76
204. In cases of Class III, the period of retention shall be reckoned from the
date on which the application for execution was finally disposed of by the Court
executing the decree, or by a Court of appeal, whichever is later. For the purpose of
this Rule, the record of each Execution Case shall be dealt with separately.
205. The destruction of all papers shall be effected by tearing them into bits
in the presence of the Record Keeper and of a responsible officer not below the rank
of the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court, or in the manner prescribed by the
High Court from time to time. The torn bits shall be disposed of in accordance with
the procedure prescribed for the disposal of waste paper.
206. A note of every file destroyed, under the above Rule, shall be made at
the time of destruction in Register No. XIII under the signature of the Record
Keeper against the entry therein relating to the said file.
207. (1) The following Registers shall be retained permanently:
 (a) Registers of Original Suits and other Original Proceedings and appeals
(other than Execution appeals) viz., (Registers Nos. I, III, V V-B, XXIII
and XXIV).
 (b) Record Room Register of Suits, other original proceedings, execution
cases and appeals disposed of (Register No. XIII).
 (2) The Registers mentioned in this sub-rule shall be retained for the periods
shown against them.

(a) Register of Small Cause Suits (Register No.II) ... 20 years
(b) Registers of Execution Cases and Execution
Appeals (Registers Nos. IV and XXV)
... 15 years
(c) Register of applications for refund of Court-fee
(Register No. VI)
... 12 years
(d) "From" (Inward) and "To" (Outward) Registers in
the Central Record Room
... 12 years
(e) Nazir's Register of Immovable Property attached
or sold (Register No. XXXI)
... 12 years
(f) Daily Register of Court-fees (Register No.VIII) ... 5 years
(g) Court Diary (Register No. IX) ... 5 years
77
(h) Register of Applications for return of documents
(Register No.XII)
.. 5 years
(i) Registers of the Nazareth Department other
than Register No. XXXI (Register Nos. XXVI to
XXX and XXXII and XXXIII)
... 5 years
(j) Others Registers (other than Registers Nos. VC, V-D and V-E) prescribed in these Rules
.. 3 years
Note.- Periods of retention mentioned above shall be reckoned from the date
of final entry in each Register. The Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court shall verify
and sign such final entry in each Register. The date of such final entry shall be
noted in red ink on the front page of the Register for ready reference and signed by
the Chief Ministerial Officer.
 The Registers shall be destroyed after the expiration of the periods
prescribed for their retention.
208. There shall be maintained in the Central Record Room:
 (a) (i) "From" (Inward) Register and
 (ii) "To" (Outward) Register; and
 (b) In respect of each Court in the District:
 (i) Register No. XIII and
 (ii) Register No. XVI for each of the categories of cases mentioned
 below:-
 (1) Original Suits;
 (2) Small Cause Suits;
 (3) Execution Cases;
 (4) Original Proceedings (other than suits and Execution
 Cases) enumerated in sub-rule (4) of Rule 5;
 (5) Regular Appeals;
 (6) Execution Appeals;
 (7) Miscellaneous Appeals;
 (8) House Rent Control Appeals.
78
Note.- The records should be kept unfolded so as to facilitate their
examination and elimination.
G. TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS BY POST
209. Arrangements for safety.- (1) Records of suits and other papers shall,
when sent by post, be first wrapped in paper packing paper and then in cloth of a
coarse and cheap kind, the edges being properly stitched and sealed and tied round
and across with a string which should be knotted in the centre and sealed.
 (2) The address shall be written on the cloth as well as on a label, which
shall be pasted on the cover and sealed at the corners.
 (3) During the monsoons wax cloth shall be used as on outer covering.
79
CHAPTER XXI
EXECUTION OF PROCESSES
(Read with Order V of the Code)
210. Service by affixing on outer door.- When service of summons is
effected under Rule 17 of Order V of the Code, the report of the serving officer, as
required by that Rule, shall be verified by an affidavit of the serving officer made
before the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court or other attesting officer.
211. (1) Verification of return.- If the process server is not personally
acquainted with the person to be served, the return shall be supported by a
verification at the foot thereof made and signed, either by the Village Officer or by a
respectable person who identifies him; and in the latter case, the full name and
address of such person shall be set out in the verification.
(2) Attestation.- Whenever service of process is effected by affixing a copy
thereof under Rule 17 of Order V of the Code, on the outer door of the house or on
some other conspicuous part thereof, the endorsement of service shall be attested
by such person in whose presence the service was so effected.
 Whenever any process is served on an illiterate person, the endorsement
pertaining to his left thumb impression shall be attested by some literate person
present at the time of such service.
Note.- Whenever practicable such attestation shall be of the Village Officer
or a respectable resident of the locality. The serving officer shall ascertain and note
in the endorsement, the addresses of such attesting witnesses.
212. Notice where summons is affixed on outer door.- If a summons is
affixed on the outer door of the house or on some other conspicuous part thereof,
the serving officer shall endorse thereon that the defendant can, upon application
to the Court within fourteen days, obtain a copy of the plaint, and shall in his
return state that he has done so and shall return the copy of the plaint to the
Court. If the summons has been sent by another Court for service and the
defendant does not, within fourteen days from the date of affixing of the summons,
apply for the said copy, it shall be returned to the said Court.
213. Vacation.- No civil warrant issued by any Court shall be executed
during the vacation of that Court, except by order of the Vacation District Judge or
Vacation Civil Judge of the District concerned.
214. (1) Every warrant for attachment of property, every warrant for sale of
property at any place outside the precincts of the Court, every warrant for delivery
of property, every injunction and every warrant of arrest when the amount of the
decree exceeds Rs. 100 shall, ordinarily, be executed by Amins.
80
 (2) Every other process, not specified in the preceding sub-rule, shall,
ordinarily, be served and executed by a Process Server, but as far as is practicable,
Process Servers shall not be entrusted with the recovery of any money in excess of
the security furnished by them.
215. Where processes of more than one class (e.g. defendant's summons,
attachment warrant, notice to show cause, etc.) are to be issued simultaneously in
respect of the same individual or property in the same proceeding, the execution of
such processes, shall, as far as possible, be entrusted to the same Amin or Process
Server as the case may be.
216. A process issued by any Court in the territory of India, shall be served,
free of charge, by any Court in the State of Karnataka, if it be certified in the
process that the proper fee has been levied under the rules in force in the territory
in which the Court issuing the process is situated.
217. Process issued by any Court in the State of Karnataka may be sent for
service to any Court in India.
218. Returns to the processes received from the Supreme Court of India for
service and execution within the State of Karnataka, shall be in English or if in
Kannada, shall be accompanied by English translation thereof, stating clearly the
manner in which service or execution has been effected, and in case of non-service
or non-execution, the reasons therefor.
219. Warrant of delivery, etc.- Whenever an Amin is entrusted with a
warrant for delivery, attachment or sale, he shall, before proceeding on the
particular trip, intimate to the decree-holder or auction purchaser, his agent or
pleader or pleader's clerk, the probable date of his leaving head quarters and the
probable date of his reaching the village or spot to execute the warrant, and obtain
his signature on the warrant, in token thereof.
220. 1[(1)] Where a process is not served or the service of the process is
defective, the Process Nazir shall note down in his own hand his opinion as to
whether the reasons assigned for the non-service or the defective service as the
case may be, are satisfactory or not.
1. Original Rule 220 renumbered as sub Rule-1 by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.
22.11.1984

2[(2) In execution proceedings if any warrant is returned unexecuted with an
endorsement that police help is required, the Court may consider the same and
pass suitable orders, and in case, the Court directs that police help is to be given it
shall be the duty of the police authorities concerned to give needful help promptly.]
2. Sub Rule (2) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984 w.e.f. 22.11.1984
81
221. The 'proper officer' to whom processes shall be transmitted for service
under Rule 9 of Order V of the Code shall be the Process Nazir of the Munsiff's
Court within whose jurisdiction the processes are to be served.
Explanation.- In Courts where there is no post of the Process Nazir, then
the expression 'proper officer' for the purpose of this Rule, shall mean such official,
as the High Court may by order specify.
222. Examination of the Amin or Process Server.- When a warrant for the
arrest of a judgment-debtor is returned unexecuted, the Amin or Process Server
shall at once appear before the Court by which the warrant was issued, with a view
to his being examined in the manner prescribed by Rule 25 of Order XXI of the
Code. If the Court finds it inconvenient to make such examination as soon as the
Amin or Process Server appears before it, it may postpone such examination to
such other date as may be fixed by it, provided that, the time that intervenes
between such date and the date fixed for the return of the warrant, is sufficient to
admit of the process being reissued, in the event of the Court holding that there
was not sufficient cause for the warrant being returned unexecuted.
 223. Emergent Process.- The Presiding Officer of the Court may, for
sufficient reason, at any hour of the day, transmit a process for emergent execution
and it shall be the duty of the process Nazir, on receiving such process signed by
the Judge, to make immediate arrangements for its execution.
 In case of special urgency, the Presiding Officer may direct the delivery of
any such process, to one of the process servers in attendance at this Court for
immediate service or execution.
1[224. Special Process Servers:- (1) The Presiding Officer of the Court may, on
the application of either party for issue of any particular process to be sent for service to an
outlying Court, direct that such particular process to be served or executed by Special
Process Server or Bailiff from hearquarters.
1. Rule 224 substituted by Notification No. LCA 1/1/90/HCLC, dated 11-3-2003, w.e.f. 17-4-2003
82
(2) Such special process server or Bailiff shall, in addition to the D.A. admissible to
him under Chapter XXVII of the Karnataka Civil Services Rules, 1958, by entitled to claim
actual fare for travel to and from the place journey by the mode of travel allowed to him
under the said rules.
 (3) The Presiding Officer may be sufficient reason direct that the cost of such
particular process be costs in the suit or proceeding.]
225. Custody of Judgment debtor.- Except for very special reasons, which
must be recorded in writing, no Court shall direct that a judgment-debtor be left in
the custody of a Process Server, unless a Second Process Server is deputed to
assist him and the charges for both at Re.1 a day for each, up to the time fixed for
the adjourned hearing, are paid in advance.
 Payments under this and preceding Rule shall be made in court fee stamps.
83
CHAPTER XXII
REFUND OF PROCESS FEE
226. When more than the amount of process fee required for service of
process is deposited or when issue of process becomes unnecessary after deposit,
the Courts are authorised to refund to the depositor the amount of the surplus or
unspent fee in the manner prescribed for refund of court-fee the unused stamps
being duly punched and cancelled, before the refund order is issued.
227. Applications for refund of process fee shall be made before the expiry
of three months from the date of the judgment of final order in the case but in the
case of process fee deposited in wrong numbers, the application shall be made
within three months from the date of deposit.
228. No fee is leviable on applications for refund of unexpended process
fees.
229. If the depositor is not present when the refund order is prepared, the
Court shall, by notice affixed to the notice board of the Court, intimate the date on
which the order is ready for issue, and if within three months from that date, the
refund order is not taken from the Court, the order shall be cancelled.
84
CHPATER XXIII
COPIES
A. APPLICATIONS PRESENTED IN COURT
230. Application by a party.- A party to a suit or proceeding is entitled, at
any stage of the proceeding, to obtain copies of the record of the suit or proceeding,
including documents which have been admitted in evidence. 1[Irrespective of
whether the documents so admitted in evidence are originals or certified copies.]
1. Added by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
2[230-A. In issuing certified copies any of the following methods, as may be
practicable may be employed.-
 (1) Preparation of copies in the manner provided by Rule 245;
 (2) Preparation of copies by photo-copying process including Photstat,
Xerox or reprograph or any other process by which the original is
mechanically or electronically copies representing faithfully the
original.
230-B. Whenever a judgment is pronounced under Order 20, Rule 1(3) and
judgment is typewritten, as provided in Order 20, Rule 6-B of the Code carbon
copies in advance following the procedure laid down in Rules 247, 248 and 249.
The party or parties so applying shall pay charges either in the shape of Court Fee
labels or in cash at the rates stated in Rule 241 or at such rate as may be specified
in the rules made by the High Court.
230-C. Whenever evidence is taken down to the dictation of the judge
directly on a typewriter, the copies of such deposition wherever it is practicable so
to do, be given to the parties applying for such copies in advance. The procedure
contained in Rule 230-B shall apply mutatis mutandis in the matter of issuance of
copies of depositions under this Rule. The copies of depositions so prepared shall
be issued to the party applying at the end of each day.]
2. Rules 230-A to 230-C inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984,
 w.e.f. 22-11-1984
3[230-D. Certified copies of documents exhibited in Civil Cases, which are
themselves copies or certified copies can be granted, on an application by a party
provided that the office uses a seal of certification as follows:
 "Certified copy of document Ex............. which purports to be the
copy/certified copy.]
(by scoring out in appropriate words)
3. Rules 230-D inserted by Notification No. RPS/134/1980, dated 22-3-1986, w.e.f. 3-4-1986
85
 231. Application by a person who is not a party.- Any person who is not
a party to the suit or proceeding, may, for sufficient reason shown to the
satisfaction of the Court, obtain copies of the plaint, written statement, applications
and affidavits filed in the suit, depositions of witnesses or judgment, decree or
order.
 232. Any person who is not a party to the suit or proceeding, desirous of
obtaining copies of documents admitted in evidence, shall make an application,
supported by an affidavit specifying the purpose for which such copies are
required, and Court may for sufficient reason shown to its satisfaction order the
grant of the same.
233. Copies of confidential papers.- Copies of the Judge's minutes, of
correspondence not strictly judicial, or generally of any confidential proceedings
shall not be granted.
234. Order of Judges in doubtful cases.- Where any doubt arises as to
whether the document, of which a copy is applied for, is one of which a copy could
be granted or not, the Examiner shall obtain the order of the Judge.
 If for any reason the Judge decides that a copy cannot be granted, the
application shall be rejected.
235. (1) An application for a copy of a document or other paper, a certified
copy of which can be given, shall be made to the Court having custody of the record
or to the Court in which the document or paper is filed or exhibited in the record.
Explanation.- The records lodged in the Central Record Room shall be
deemed, for purpose of this Rule, to be in the custody of the District Court, to
which the Central Record Room is attached.
 (2) Such application shall set forth.-
 (a) the name of the applicant and his position (if any) in the suit or
proceeding; also the name of his pleader and pleader's clerk (if any);
 (b) the number of the suit or proceeding mentioning whether the same is
pending or disposed of and the date of disposal, if disposed of; and
86
(c) the description of the document or the paper and if the document is
exhibited, its exhibit number and the proceeding in which it is filed or
exhibited and the date of the document, if any.
 (3) The application should be presented to the Chief Ministerial Officer or
such other officer as the Court may appoint for the purpose.
 (4) The officer receiving the application shall endorse, in red ink, on the
application the date of receipt and the number of copying sheets, if any, produced
with it and after making an entry or getting an entry made in respect thereof in the
Daily Register of Court-fees of the Court (Register No. VIII), pass on the application
with its enclosures of the Examiner of Copies.
236. (1) Any application not containing the particulars required to be
specified under Rule 235 shall not be admitted until it is amended in respect of
matters in which it is defective.
 (2) If the date of disposal of the case is not stated in the application, it may
be ascertained from the office by the officer receiving the application and noted on
the application.
 (3) Register No. X-A shall be used for notifying defects, if any, in the
application and the date on which the applicant should appear to ascertain the
number of copying sheets or the amount of copying charges to be furnished.
 (4) If the application is complete, the Examiner shall enter it in the Register
of Applications for copies (Register No. X).
1[236-A. Copy applications may be received and certified copies of
documents referred to in this Chapter may be granted even during vacations.]
1. Rule 236-A, inserted by Notification No. ROC No. 1058/68, dated 16-5-1969, w.e.f. 22-5-1969
2[236-B. Where application for certified copy of the judgment, decree, order,
depositions or any other document is filled by the Government Pleader attached to
the Court on behalf of the State Government or an Officer of the State Government
copies thereof shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, be
supplied by the Court, free of cost on plain paper.]
2. Rule 236-B, inserted by Notification No. RPC No. 16/1983(1), dated 10-4-1984, w.e.f. 3-5-1984
237. (1) When records of the case have been despatched to the Central
Record Room or to any Court of Appeal or Revision, the application shall be
forwarded to the Record Keeper in charge of the Central Record Room (or to the
copy Examiner, of any such Court), whose duty it shall then be to inform the Court
what number of copying sheets are required for the copy. When the requisite
number of sheets have been forwarded to the Record Keeper or Copy Examiner, as
the case may be, the copy shall be made without delay and shall be sent by post to
the Court for delivery to the applicant.
87
 (2) The applicant shall pay one rupee in the form of court-fee stamps
towards expenses of correspondence if the record of which copy is applied for is not
in the Court to which the application is made any expenses therefor in excess of
one rupee being recoverable in the same form before the copy is delivered to him.
238. When the application has been registered the record shall at once be
obtained by the Examiner from the Record Keeper or Clerk in whose possession it
is, and the applicant shall be notified (vide Register No. X-B) to produce within the
time fixed in accordance with Rule 240, the number of copying sheets required for
the copy. The estimate should cover the postal expenses also, if the applicant
desires to have the copy sent by post. The preparation of the copy shall not be
commenced until he has supplied in full the number of copying sheets stated to be
required.
239. If the applicant fails to produce the required number of copying sheets
within the time fixed for the purpose or the time extended by the Court, the
Presiding Officer shall pass an order rejecting the application (See Register No.X-C).
240. The time to be fixed for production of sheets shall not exceed fifteen
days.
241. Ordinary Charges.- Charges for preparation of certified copies shall be
calculated at the rate of 35 paise for a folio. A 'folio' means a group of 175 words. If
however, the entire text to be copied is less than 175 words, the said text shall be
treated as one folio. If the total number of words to be copied, divided by 175,
leaves a remainder less than 175 words, the said remainder shall also be treated as
one folio.
Illustrations
 1. The text to be copied has a total number of 50 words or 100 words or
174 words. In each case it is to be treated as one folio.
 2. The text to be copied has 360 words. It is equal to three folios made up
of two units of 175 words each, and a remainder of ten words, each
one of them being treated as a folio.
 242. Initials, Abbreviations and Figures.- Initials prefixed to names of
persons shall not be counted as a separate word or words, but the entire name
together with the initials shall be counted as one word. Where, however, the name
or village or place, surname, father's name or family name is fully spelt out, each of
such names shall be counted as one word.
88
Where abbreviations are used for giving the description or number or
proceedings or for citation of cases or sections of statutes, five letters shall be
counted as one word and any excess over complete group or groups of five letters,
included in the abbreviation, shall be counted as one word although the number of
letters in excess is less than five. For this purpose each figure shall be deemed to
be a letter.
 Figures used for indicating ranks of parties in cause title or for numbering
paragraphs, shall not be counted. In other cases, a group of five figures shall be
counted as one word.
Illustrations
 1. "Section 205 C.P.C." counts as three words, i.e., the word 'Section' is
one word, '205 C.P." is one word and 'C' is one word.
 2. "I.L.R. 3 Bom. 260" counts as two words, i.e., 'I.L.R. 3.B' is one word
and 'om. 260' is one word.
 3. "M.O. Parthasarathi Iyengar" will count as two words.
 243. Charges for emergent Copies.- Where copies are required
emergently, an additional charge, calculated at the rate of 5 paise for a folio shall
be paid, subject to a minimum of one rupee and a maximum of five rupees.
 244. 1[Charges for copies of maps, plans and documents].- In the case of
maps and plans, etc., a reasonable fee (having regard to the skill, labour and time
required for preparing the copy) shall in each case be fixed by the Court and
deposited in cash by the party applying, in the same manner as for a commission
under the Code. The whole of such fee shall be paid to the person employed for
preparing the copy, who shall use his own material for that purpose.
1. Substituted for the word “Charges for copies of laps and plans inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982
dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
245. Payment of Charges and mode of utilisation.- (1) Unless otherwise
provided by these Rules or any other law for the time being in force:
2[(a) Copying charges shall be paid in the shape of impressed copying
sheets of the value of Re. 1/- prepared under the orders of the State
Government or in the shape of Court Fee Labels]1
2. Clause (a) substituted by Notification No. LCA-1/633/95/HCLC, dated 23-4-2001 w.e.f. 06.09.2001
 (b) Additional charges for emergent copies, and postage, whenever
payable, shall be paid in court-fee labels.
89
(2) Where ordinary charges are paid either in court-fee labels or in cash as
hereinafter provided, copies shall be prepared on substantial foolscap paper and
the payment of charges and the mode of payment shall be certified at the top of the
first sheet by the Record Keeper or the examiner, as the case may be, over his
signature.
 (3) Where copying sheets are used for preparation of copies, 175 words shall
be typewritten or written on a single sheet. Where, however, the said full number of
words cannot be written on one side of the sheet, the number of words necessary to
make up the total of 175 words may be written on the reverse.
(4) a margin of 11/2 inches should always be provided on the left hand side
of the front page of the sheet and on the right hand side of the reverse.
246. Preparation of copies.- (1) Preparation of the copy shall be
undertaken without delay on production of copying sheets and the copy made
ready for delivery ordinarily within 15 days of production of copying sheets. On the
date of production of copying sheets, the Examiner shall notify the applicant, the
date on which he is to appear to take delivery of the copy. (Vide Register No. X-D).
 (2) The preparation of copies shall be undertaken in the order in which
charges are paid:
 Provided that, an application for an urgent copy shall be given precedence.
On such application, charges shall be called for within 24 hours of the receipt of
the application and copies delivered within 48 hours of payment of charges. In
computing the above periods, every Sunday and holidays, on which the Court is
closed, shall be excluded.
 (3) Pages of copies shall be serially numbered.
1[(4) When a party desires to have a certified copy, by the photo-copying as
stated in Rule 230-A and the Court has the equipment to prepare certified copy of
photocopying process finds it convenient, it may issue copies prepared by adopting
the photo-copying process subject to the following procedure, namely:-
 (1) The rate per copy shall be determined by the High Court from time to
time and till such determination is made the charges per rate of
foolscap size or any smaller size shall be Rs. 2.
 (2) When the copy has been so prepared, it shall be compared by the
examiner with the original, aided by a reader, who may be a copyist.
The text to read out shall be the original. The copyist examiner after
such comparison and after satisfying himself that the copy prepared by
the photo-copying process faithfully reproduces the original, shall
append a certificate as under.
1. Sub-rule 4 inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27-10-1984, w.e.f. 22-11-1984
90
 'Certificate'.- Certified that this is a true and accurate copy of the
original. All the matter appearing in original has been faithfully copied
with no modifications.]
NOTIFICATION
No. LCA-I/270/1986, dated 20.8.1987
[Karnataka Gazette, dated 29.10.1987]
Determination of charges for issue of Certified Copy
prepared by adopting Photo Coping Process
 In exercise of the powers conferred under sub-clause (1), sub-rule
(4) of Rule 246 of the Karnataka Civil Rules of Practice, 1967 (as
amended in 1983), the High Court of Karnataka, in supersession of
earlier notification dated 25th June, 1986, determines the charges for
furnishing Certified copies taken by Photo Copying Process at Re.1/-
(Rupee One) per page with immediate effect.
________
247. Comparing.- When the copy applied for has been prepared by the
copyist, it shall be compared by the Examiner aided by a reader who may be the
copyist; but in no case shall the original be read to an Examiner nor shall the
Examiner be in any way assisted by the copyist who prepared the copy. The test to
be read out shall be the original.
 248. Correction and Certification.- When a copy is ready, it shall be
certified in the manner prescribed by Section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act. The
certificate that is a true shall, after examination be signed by the Examiner. All
corrections shall be initialled by him and the number of corrections shall be noted
at the foot of each copying sheet (or page, if both sides of the sheet are used). The
practice of making erasure, by scratching out or otherwise effacing words, is
strictly prohibited. Corrections shall be made by drawing a pen through the word
to be cancelled and by writing the substituted word above the word so cancelled.
249. Endorsement and seal.- (1) The last sheet of every copy, and if no
space is available therein the reverse side of the last sheet, shall bear the following
endorsements:-
 1. Copy applied for on ............................................................................
 2. Copying sheets/charges required to be produced on ..........................
 3. Copying sheets/charges produced on ................................................
 4. Applicant required to appear on .........................................................
 5. Applicant appeared on .......................................................................
91
 6. Copy ready on* ..................................................................................
 7. Copy delivered on* .............................................................................
 8. Copied by ...........................................................................................
 9. Examined by ......................................................................................
 *To be filled in and initialled by the Chief Ministerial Officer both on the
copy in the Register.
Notes 1. The dates referred to in this rule shall be expressed in figures and
not in words and all corrections shall be properly attested. The
Chief Ministerial Officer shall satisfy himself that these entries
have been correctly made.
2. The Presiding Judge also should be examining Register No. X from
time to time and perusing the copies satisfy himself that the
endorsements on copies are properly and correctly made.
 A rubber stamp may be used for the above endorsements. But the dates
shall be entered by the official concerned in ink, and the date on which the copy
was ready in red ink.
 (2) The seal of the Court shall, when the copy is ready for delivery, be
affixed to each sheet by or in the presence of the Chief Ministerial Officer.
250. Delivery of Copies.- (1) Copies shall be delivered to the applicants
during office hours. Unused copying sheets, if any, shall not be retained in the
office but shall be attached to the copy, for the preparation of which they were
furnished, and shall be returned to the applicant along with the copy.
 (2) If the applicant requests that the copy be sent by post and pays the
postage therefor in cash or court fee labels, the copy shall be forwarded by
registered packet prepaid for acknowledgement. In such case "Copy posted" shall
be substituted for "Copy delivered", in the endorsement referred to in Rule 249 and
in columns 21 and 22 of the Register of Applications for Copies, the date of
despatch shall be entered and the signature of the despatching clerk taken.
251. When copies have been made ready for delivery, the records shall at
once be returned to the Record Keeper or Clerk, from whom they had been
obtained.
92
252. Manner of notifying the applicant.- (1) In copy applications other
than those received by post, the following procedure shall be adopted for notifying
the requirements and return and rejection of copy applications to the applicants:-
 (a) Register No. X-A shall be maintained for notifying the defects for
rectification and for notifying the date on which the applicant should
appear to ascertain the number of copying sheets or charges to be
furnished;
 (b) Register No. X-B shall be maintained for notifying the copying sheets
or charges required and the dates by which they have to be produced;
 (c) Register No. X-D shall be maintained for notifying the dates on which
the applicants have to appear to receive copies;
 (d) Register No. X-C shall be maintained for notifying the rejection or
return of copy applications.
 (2) The above registers shall be kept at a conspicuous place in the Copying
Branch for easy access to the applicants during office hours.
 (3) Apart from making entries in the above registers no other notice shall be
required to be given to the parties in the case of copy applications other than those
received by post unless the Presiding Officer otherwise orders.
 (4) In the case of a copy applications received by post and also where an
applicant has paid the required fee for correspondence as prescribed, intimations
should be sent by post and the entries in respect thereof shall be immediately
made in Register No. X-E.
253. Rejection of copy applications for non-compliance.- (1) A Copy
application shall be rejected by the Presiding Officer of the Court:-
 (a) if in the case of copy application received by post, cash of Rs. 3
prescribed as initial remittance is not received in the Court within
seven days from the date on which the application is received in
Court; or
 (b) if the applicant fails to rectify the defects notified within the time
given for that purpose; or
 (c) if the applicant fails to produce the required number of copying
sheets or the required amount of copying or other charges within the
time fixed for the purpose or the time extended by the Court; or
 (d) if the applicant does not comply with any other requirement ordered
to be fulfilled by the Presiding Officer of the Court to enable the
preparation of the copy, within the time granted.
93
 (2) On such rejection, the copying sheets already produced and the copying
or other charges already paid shall be returned or refunded to the applicant as in
the case of return of excess copying sheets and refund of excess copying or other
charges.
B. APPLICATIONS SENT BY POST
 254. Applications for certified copies may be sent by post. Such
applications shall be addressed to the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court to
which they are sent. Rules 230 to 253 shall apply to such applications also, as far
as may be, subject to the following modifications and the succeeding Rules:-
 (a) every such application shall contain the correct postal address of the
applicant and all such particulars as are necessary to ensure delivery
to the applicant of every postal communication in connection with the
application and of the copy, when ready;
 (b) every such application shall be accompanied by a payment of not
less than Rs. 3 towards expenses of correspondence and the postage
for despatching the copy when ready, any expenditure on that
account in excess of Rs. 3 being recoverable before the copy is
despatched;
 (c) all charges inclusive of the charges specified in clause (b) above in
respect of such applications shall be paid in cash or remitted by
postal money order.
 (d) (i) the date of receipt of initial remittance under clause (b), as endorsed
on the application by the Nazir under Rule 255 shall be treated as the
date on which the application is made to the Court;
 Provided that, where the application is received on a date subsequent to the
receipt of the remittance, then, such date shall be deemed to be the date of the
application.
 (ii) the date on which the letter or communication requiring the applicant
to pay the charges or additional charges is posted, shall be deemed to
be the date on which such charges or additional charges are called;
 (iii) the date of receipt of the charges set out in the Nazir's endorsement
under Rule 256 shall be deemed to be the date on which such
charges or additional charges are paid;
 (iv) the date on which the copy is delivered to the post office for being
forwarded by registered post, shall be deemed to be the date on which
the copy is delivered to the applicant; and
94
 (v) the dates aforesaid shall be the dates to be entered in the appropriate
columns of the Register of Applications for copies for the
endorsements referred to in Rule 249.
 255. When an application is received by post, the Chief Ministerial Officer
shall endorse thereon the words "Received by Post" and shall initial and date the
same. He shall thereafter send the application to the Nazir dealing with cash. All
cash remittances received in respect of such application, shall also be sent by Chief
Ministerial Officer to the Nazir. The Nazir shall retain the said application with him,
until the initial remittance of Rs.3 under clause (b) of Rule 254 is received and
endorsement in respect thereof is made by him, as provided in the next succeeding
Rule. He shall, thereafter, transfer the copy application to the Copy Examiner for
further action.
256. (1) All cash payments in connection with copy applications shall be
made only to the Nazir. Immediately on receipt of any such cash payment, the
Nazir shall send for (from the Copy Examiner) the application in connection with
which the payment is received (if the application is not already with him) and enter
the receipt of cash in the Cash Register of the Court with the particulars of the
copy application. He shall simultaneously make an endorsement on the application
in red ink, mentioning the date of receipt, the amount of cash received and the
serial number of the entry in the Cash Register. If the copy application bears any
previous endorsement or endorsement of like nature made by the Nazir, every
subsequent endorsement shall be made immediately below the previous
endorsement.
 (2) Every such endorsement shall be in the handwriting of the Nazir
himself, who has received the cash and shall be initialled by him.
 257. All amounts received in cash in respect of copy applications shall, after
entry into the Cash Register, be placed to the credit of judicial Deposit. For
preparing copies applied for by post, the Court shall purchase copying sheets from
the Treasury on indent, from the funds allotted for contingent expenditure and
keep them in stock, provided that, the Court shall adjust its indent for copying
sheets in such a way that the stock of copying sheets on hand does not exceed 500
at any time. Similarly postal stamps required for correspondence in respect of copy
applications and for sending copies by registered post, shall be purchased from the
funds allotted for contingency and kept in stock, provided that, the purchase is so
adjusted that the value of stock of postage stamps on hand does not exceed Rs.25
at any time. The Nazir shall have the custody of the copying sheets and the postage
stamps purchased as above and he shall be responsible for accounting for the
same, and for recoupment of the value thereof, from the amounts paid by the
parties. The value of copying sheets utilised for copy applications received by post
95
and the value of postage spent shall be credited as revenue to Government from
the amounts in Judicial Deposit, as stated above.
258. The Nazir shall maintain Registers Nos. X-F and X-G and the
responsible for appropriate entries being made therein promptly and correctly.
259. The Examiner shall, after ascertaining that there is sufficient amount
to the credit of the applicant in Judicial Deposit, indent for the required number of
copying sheets and postage stamps and obtain the same from the Nazir and
account for the same to him. All unused copying sheets in respect of copy
applications received by post and unexpended postage shall be returned by the
Examiner to the Nazir promptly. The Nazir shall also, before issuing copying sheets
and postage stamps required by the Examiner verify, from the copy application and
the Judicial Deposit Register, that there is need for such issue and there is
sufficient amount to cover the expenditure.
260. As soon as the Examiner utilise the copying sheets and prepares the
copy or spends the postage, he should make an entry to that effect in Register
No.X-H maintained by the Nazir and simultaneously return the unused copying
sheets and postage, if any, to the Nazir and make necessary entries in the said
Register. As soon as the Examiner makes the above entries, the Nazir shall enter
the particulars of amounts actually spent towards copying fee and/or postage in
the Judicial Deposit Register and Register No X-H and periodically take steps to
credit the equivalent amount to the revenue of the State Government from the
amounts in Judicial Deposit and close the entries in Register No. X-J. The
Presiding Officer shall, once in a month check the Registers maintained by the
Nazir and the Examiner of Copies and record a certificate in Register No.X-J after
satisfying himself that the value of the copying sheets and postage purchased from
the contingency is being recouped to Government regularly and promptly.
96
261. (1) The Examiner shall not deliver any copy with unused sheets, if
any, to the applicant if he does not appear to receive the copy within 6 months
from the date on which he was required to appear to receive the copy. In such
event the copy shall be destroyed in the manner prescribed for destruction of
records; the unused sheets, if any, shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed in
sub-rule (3).
 (2) The Examiner shall not return to the applicant the unused sheets, if
any, after the application is ordered to be returned or rejected, if the applicant does
not appear to receive them within a period of 6 months from the date of order for
the return of the copy application or from the date of order of rejection of the copy
application, as the case may be, but he shall deal with such sheets in the manner
prescribed in sub-rule (3).
 (3) At the end of each calendar month, the Examiner shall sort out the copy
applications in which the applicants have failed to take back the unused copying
sheets for a period of 6 months as stated in sub-rules (1) and (2) and prepare a
statement in Form No.18 in respect of those applications and make the necessary
entries in Register No. X-H and hand over the said statement under his signature
along with all the unused copying sheets relating to the said copy applications to
the Nazir and obtain his acknowledgement in the said Register. The Nazir shall
thereupon check the entries in the statement and the total number unclaimed
copying sheets with reference to the copy applications and make an endorsement
on each of the copy applications that the unclaimed copying sheets are received by
him for crediting their value to the applicant in the concerned case as a Judicial
Deposit. While doing so, he shall also mention the number of copying sheets and
their value in money in the said endorsement. He shall then send the statement in
Form No. 19 in duplicate, with all the copying sheets, to the Treasury in which the
Court is making Judicial Deposits for receiving the sheets and crediting the value
of copying sheets in each case to the Judicial Deposits, as stated in the statement
and returning the duplicate to the Court with a note on it intimating the fact of
crediting all the amounts to the Judicial Deposit as stated therein. The Nazir shall
then enter the amounts in the accounts maintained in the Court in respect of
Judicial Deposits and preserve the duplicate statement returned by the Treasury
with him.
 (4) The value of the copying sheets credited to the Judicial Deposit, as
stated above, can be claimed and obtained by the applicant in the manner in which
amounts in Judicial Deposit can be claimed and obtained.
97
C. FREE COPIES
 262. Nothing contained in these Rules shall apply to printed copies or to
copies which under any provision of law, or rule having the force of law, the Courts
are required to grant free of cost.
CHAPTER XXIV
REGISTERS
 263. (1) Every Court shall maintain the Registers mentioned in Part I of
Appendix B in the forms set out therein. Every Court exercising appellate
jurisdiction shall, in addition, maintain the Registers mentioned in Part II of
Appendix B. Courts having the Nazarath (Process) shall, in addition, maintain the
Registers mentioned in Part III of Appendix B.
 Provided that a Court which is not required to deal with the work for which
a particular Register is intended may not maintain such Register.
 (2) The Registers shall always be written up to date by the concerned clerks
under the supervision of the Chief Ministerial Officer and shall be inspected by the
Presiding Officer of the Court not less than once a month.
 (3) Proceedings under each of the categories mentioned in Rule 5 shall be
numbered and registered in chronological order for each calendar year.
Note.- In addition to the Registers mentioned above, the Courts shall
maintain such special Registers as may be prescribed by or under any special
statute.
98
CHAPTER XXV
MISCELLANEOUS
 264. Register No. XIV shall be maintained by each Court and the relevant
particulars of the communication required to be made to the Deputy Commissioner
of any error appearing in an entry in the Record of Rights or the Register of
Mutations and any alteration therein that may be required by reason of a decree or
order in a suit or application relating to land as provided in Section 132(3) of the
Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964, shall be entered therein and the necessary
communication shall be sent promptly to the Deputy Commissioner from time to
time.
1[CHAPTER XXVI
LEGAL AID TO INDIGENT PERSONS
265. Where a party in the proceedings by reason of economic disability is
not represented by an advocate, the Court may advice such parties to approach the
Local Legal Aid Committee constituted by the Karnataka Legal Aid Board for Legal
Aid.
266. The fee and other charges payable to the counsel appointed by the
Legal Aid Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the Karnataka Legal
Aid Board.
267. A counsel appointed by the Legal Aid Committee shall be given the
following facilities by the Court:-
 (i) Right to inspect the records of the case in the presence of a
responsible official of the Court and make out copies unless the court
finds reason to prohibit or restrict the same to any extent;
 (ii) Exemption from payment of court fee on vakalat and on interlocutory
applications and also process fee;
 (iii) Furnishing free copies of depositions and Judgments or Orders
prepared simultaneously by carbon process when such depositions,
Judgments, or Orders are typed in the ordinary course.
268. Wherever Court Fee is ordinarily payable, but is exempted for the time
being for the reason that Legal Aid has been given, the fee so payable shall be
included in the costs awarded in the case and in the event of recovery, be credited
to the Karnataka Legal Aid Board. It shall not be permissible for the indigent
person to appropriate such part of the cost for himself.]

1. Chapter XXVI (Rules 265 to 268) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f.
22.11.1984
99
1[CHAPTER XXVII
MODE OF PAYMENT THROUGH CHEQUES IN CERTAIN CASES
 269. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, rules, order or
decree of a Court, any amount equal to or in excess of Rs. 5,000 payable to any
party or individuals, shall be paid by drawing 'Account Payee' cheque in the name
of such party or individuals, as are in the opinion of the drawing officer, competent
to give a full and effective discharge for and on behalf of all the persons entitled
thereto, and the cheque so drawn shall be handed over to the payee or payees in
the presence of the Presiding Officer who shall take all steps necessary for the
proper identification of the payee or payees:
 Provided that before drawing such cheque, it shall be lawful for the drawing
officer to call upon the payee or payees to furnish security to his satisfaction for
the due performance of the obligations if any, arising on receipt of the cheque]1
2[Provided further that in the Bangalore City Civil Court the cheque shall be
handed over to the payee or payees by the Registrar of the City Civil Court, after
obtaining full satisfaction as to the identification of the payee or payees.]
_______________

1. Chpater XXVII (Rule 269) inserted by Notification No. LCA-1/444/1982, dated 27.10.1984, w.e.f. 22.11.1984.
2. Second Proviso inserted by Notification No. LCA I 49/92, dated 6.1.1993, w.e.f. 28.1.1993
100
PPENDIX A
FORMS
Form
No.
Description Rule of Practice
1. Valuation Slip ... 11, 103
2. Process Memo ... 20, 22, 39, 40
3. Summons-House of the People/Council of
States
... 45
4. Deposition Sheet ... 52
5. Letter of request by one Court to the
Presiding Judge of another court for the
production of records
... 77
6. Summons for the production of public
records and other documents in the
possession of a public servant other than a
Court
... 80
7. Summons for documents in the custody of
the House of the People or the Council of
States
... 81
8. List of documents exhibited ... 84, 92
9. Title Sheet for Judgments in Suits ... 91
10. List of witnesses examined ... 92
11. Title sheet for Judgments in Appeals ... 93
12. List of draft decrees for scrutiny by Pleaders
concerned
... 101
13. Application for transfer of decree or order ... 106
14. Order Sheet ... 155, 181(b)
15. Table of Contents ... 181(a), 192
16. Title page ... 193
17. List accompanying records sent to Central
Record Room
... 197
18. Statement of unclaimed copying sheets by
Examiner to Nazir
... 261
19. Statement of unclaimed copying sheets by
Nazir to Treasury
... 261
101
FORM NO. 1 (CIVIL)
Valuation Slip
(R.P. 11, 103)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Suit No. of 20 .............
.............................................Vs.......................................
Valuation Slip
Serial No. of the
property in
plaint schedule
The clause of Section 7(2)
of the Karnataka Court
Fees and Suits Valuation
Act, 1958 under which the
property comes.
The amount
of Revenue or
other basis
for valuation
Method
adopted to
arrive at the
valuation
Valuation
arrived at
1 2 3 4 5

________________
FORM NO. 2 (CIVIL)
Process Memo
(R.P. 20, 22, 39, 40)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Case No. of 20 .............
.............................................Vs.......................................
 Please issue summons/notice/process to the following party/parties:-
 Process fee of Rs.................as calculated below is paid herewith.
Copy/Copies of the plaint, memo of appeal/petition/application and ..................
copy/copies of the affidavit/memo of fact is/are produced herewith.
Rank of the party
Name of the party
Address for service
Calculation of process fee
Dated................ Pleader for..............
102
FORM NO. 3 (CIVIL)
Summons-House of the People/Legislative Assembly
Council of States / Legislative Council
(R.P. 45)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Case No. of 20 .............
.......................................................................... Plaintiff
Vs
........................................................................Defendant
To
 The Speaker of the House of the People/Legislative Assembly
 The Chairman of the Council of States/Legislative Council
Parliament House, New Delhi
Vidhana Soudha, Bangalore-1
Sir,
 In the above proceeding, the plaintiff/defendant proposes to examine
..........................................................................an Officer in the Secretariat of the
(House of the People/the Council of State)
(Legislative Assembly/Legislative Council)
(or any duly informed Officer in the Secretariat of the House) as a witness in regard
to matters specified in the annexure. I have to request you to move the House to
grant leave for the examination of the said Officer in my Court, and, if such leave is
granted, to direct the Officer to appear in my Court at 11 A.M. on .............20........
Yours faithfully,
Dated......................
103
FORM NO. 4 (CIVIL)
Deposition Sheet
 (R.P. 52)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Case No. of 20 .............
.....................................Witness for.....................................
Deposition of :
Father's Name :
Age :
Religion :
Occupation :
Residence :
__________
FORM NO. 5 (CIVIL)
Letter of request by one Court to the Presiding Judge of another Court for the
production of records
(R.P. 77)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Suit No. of 20 .............
........................................................................................... Plaintiff
Vs
..........................................................................................Defendant
To
 The Judge of the Court of..............................................................................
 Whereas upon the application of the above named .......................................
.......................................it has been made to appear to this Court that a perusal of
the undermentioned papers, now in your custody is of material importance in the
above suit/appeal/case now before this Court and it is found that the production of
the original documents is necessary for the purpose of Justice, you are hereby
requested to cause the said papers to be produced in this Court/or transmit the
said papers to this Court, on or before the.................. day of ................. 20............
(Enter description of papers)
..................................
 Judge
104
FORM NO. 6 (CIVIL)
Summons for the production of public records and other documents in the
possession of a public servant other than a Court
(R.P. 80)
IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Suit No. of 20 .............
........................................................................................... Plaintiff
Vs
..........................................................................................Defendant
To
 .........................................
 .........................................
 Whereas upon the application of the above named .......................................
.......................................it has been made to appear to this Court that a perusal of
the undermentioned papers, now in your custody is of material importance in the
above suit/appeal/case now before this Court and it is found that the production of
the original documents is necessary for the purpose of Justice, or that the said
applicant cannot obtain a duly authenticated copy of the same without
unreasonable delay or expense, you are hereby requested to cause the said papers
to be produced in this Court/or transmit the said papers to this Court, on or before
the.................. day of ................. 20............
 (Enter description of papers)
..................................
 Judge
________________
FORM NO. 7 (CIVIL)
Summons for documents in the custody of the House of the
People/Legislative Assembly or the Council of States/Legislative Council
(R.P. 81)
105
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Case No. of 20 .............
.......................................................................... Plaintiff
Vs
........................................................................Defendant
To
 The Speaker of the House of the People/Legislative Assembly
 The Chairman of the Council of States/Legislative Council
Parliament House, New Delhi
Vidhana Soudha, Bangalore-1
Sir,
 In the above proceeding, the plaintiff/defendant proposes to rely upon the
documents specified in the annexure which are in the custody of the
House of the People/the Council of State
Legislative Assembly/Legislative Council
I have to request you to move the House to grant leave for the production of
documents, in my Court, and if such leave is granted to arrange to send the
doucments so as to reach me or before .................... by registered post
(acknowledgment due) or through an officer in the Secretariat of the House.
Yours faithfully,
Dated......................
106
FORM NO. 8 (CIVIL)
List of documents exhibited
(R.P. 84, 92)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...................................................................................
 Suit No....................................... of 20............
LIST OF DOCUMENTS EXHIBITED FOR THE PLAINTIFF/DEFENDANT
 Exhibit No. Description of Date of the document Remarks
 the document
 ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
 ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
 ..................... ..................... ..................... .....................
 Note.- When a document bears only a vernacular date the corresponding
English date shall be given.
107
FORM NO. 9 (CIVIL)
Title Sheet for Judgments in Suits
(R.P. 91)
TITLE SHEET FOR JUDGEMENTS IN SUITS
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...............................................................................
 Present.................................................................................................
(Name of the Presiding Judge)
Suit No......................................of 20...............
Plaintiff
 ..........................................................................................
Plaintiffs
 (By Pleader Sri...................................................................)
Vs.
Defendant
 ..........................................................................................
Defendants
 (By Pleader Sri...................................................................)
Date of institution of the suit...................................................................................
Nature of the suit (suit on pronote, suit for declaration
and possession, suit for injunction, etc.) .................................................................
Date of the commencement of the recording
of the evidence ........................................................................................................
Date on which the judgment was pronounced .........................................................
 Year/s Month/s Day/s
Total duration
 Note.- The names and descriptions of all the plaintiffs and defendants as
stated in the plaint should be mentioned.
___________
108
FORM NO. 10 (CIVIL)
Lists of Witnesses Examined
(R.P. 92)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...............................................................................
 Suit No....................................... of 20..............
...............................................Vs..............................................
Witnesses examined for the Plaintiff/Defendant
No. Name
.......................... .................................................................................
.......................... .................................................................................
.......................... .................................................................................
.......................... .................................................................................
_____________
109
FORM NO. 11 (CIVIL)
Title Sheet for Judgments in Appeals
(R.P. 93)
TITLE SHEET FOR JUDGMENTS IN APPEALS
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...............................................................................
 Present.................................................................................................
(Name of the Presiding Judge)
Date of Judgement ………………….
REGULAR EXECUTION/MISCELLANEOUS/H.R.C.
APPEAL No.......................... of 20...............
Appellant
 ..........................................................................................
Appellants
 (By Pleader Sri...................................................................)
Vs.
Respondent
 ..........................................................................................
Respondents
 (By Pleader Sri...................................................................)
Date and Nature of the decree
or order appealed against .......................................................................................
Date of the institution of the Appeal ......................................................................
Year/s Month/s Day/s
Duration of the Appeal
 Note.- The names and descriptions of all the Appellants and Respondents
should be mentioned.
___________
110
FORM NO. 12 (CIVIL)
List of draft decrees for scrutiny by Pleaders concerned
(R.P. 101)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT ...............................................................................
LIST OF DRAFT DECREES FOR SCRUTINY BY PLEADERS CONCERNED
No. of the suit
or proceeding
Name of Pleaders for
Plaintiff/s
Appellant/s
Defendant/s
Respondent/s
Date on which the Notice is affixed to
 the Court Notice Board..........................................................................
 Note.- Objections, if any, should be furnished to the decree writer by means
of a memo within three days.
Signature of the
Chief Ministerial Officer
________________
111
FORM NO. 13 (CIVIL)
Application for transfer of decree or order
(R.P. 106)
 IN THE COURT OF ...............................................................................
 AT .................................................................................
 Ex. C. No....................................... of 20........................
 Suit No ........................................ of 20........................
.......................................................................... Plaintiff/s
Vs
........................................................................Defendant/s
Name of the Decree-holder
Name of the Judgment-debtor
The above named decree-holder states as follows:-
(a) Number of the suit
(b) Names of the parties
(c) Date of the decree
(d) Whether any appeal has been preferred from the decree
(e) Whether any, and (if any) what, payment or other
adjustment of the matter in controversy has been made
between the parties subsequently to the decree.
(f) Whether any, and (if any) what, previous applications
have been made for the execution of the decree, the dates
of such applications and their results.
(g) The amount with interest (if any) due upon the decree, or
other relief granted thereby together with particulars of
any cross decree, whether passed before or after the date
of the decree sought to be executed.
(h) The amount of the costs (if any) awarded
(i) The name of the person against whom execution of the
decree is sought.
 (Herein set out the facts relied on to bring the case within the relevant
provisions of Section 39 and Order XXI, Rules 4 and 5 of the Code).
 The decree-holder prays that the said decree may be transferred (through
the District Court of.........) to the Court of the .............at.......for execution.
Decree-holder.
Pleader for the Decree-holder,
............................
(Enter verification)
112
FORM NO. 14(CIVIL)
Order Sheet
(R.P. 155, 181 (b))
Page No................
 IN THE COURT OF ................................................................
 AT ..................................................................
 No....................................... of 20....................
......................................................
Vs
......................................................
Date or order proceeding with the signature
of the Presiding Officer
______________
FORM NO. 15(CIVIL)
Table of Contents
(R.P. 181 (a) 192)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 IN THE COURT OF ................................................................
 AT ..................................................................
 Suit (or case) No................ of 20....................
Class.......................... File.........................
Sl. No.
of paper
Sheets Description Value of Courtfee stamps
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5
 Rs. Ps.
Total value of Court-fee stamps
113
FORM NO. 16 (CIVIL)
Title Page
(R.P. 193)
TITLE PAGE
Class.......................... File.........................
 IN THE COURT OF ................................................................
 AT ..................................................................
 .........................No............. of 20....................
Name of first Plaintiff/Appellant/Petitioner/Decree-holder
Name of first Defendant/Respondent/Judgment-debtor
Date of decision.................
FORM NO. 17 (CIVIL)
List accompanying records sent to Central Record Room
(R.P. 197)
LIST ACCOMPANYING RECORDS SENT TO
CENTRAL RECORD ROOM
 IN THE COURT OF ................................................................
 AT ..................................................................
Serial No.
of disposal
Date of
disposal
Nature
and No. of
the case
with year
Files (such as
A, B, C)
container in
the record
Plaintiff
Petitioner
Decree-holder
Appellant
Defendant
Respondent
Judgment
debtor
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

____________
114
FORM NO. 18 (CIVIL)
Statement of unclaimed copying sheets by Examiner to Nazir
(R.P. 261)
 IN THE COURT OF ................................................................
 AT ..................................................................
Statement showing the unclaimed copying sheets to be surrendered and
value thereof to be kept in Judicial Deposit to the credit of the applicants in the
concerned copy applications, by Examiner to Nazir. Serial Number Copy Application Number Name of the applicant Case Number Number of unclaimed copying sheets
Value of the
unclaimed copying
sheets
Account head to
which credited to
Copying fee
refundable in cash
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Signature of Examiner,
Date: …………..
_____________
115
FORM NO. 19 (CIVIL)
Statement of unclaimed copying sheets by Nazir to Treasury
(R.P. 261)
 IN THE COURT OF ................................................................
 AT ..................................................................
Statement showing the unclaimed copying sheets to be surrendered and
value thereof to be kept in Judicial Deposit to the credit of the applicants in the
concerned copy applications, by Nazir to Treasury.
Date.................
To
 The Treasury Officer,
 District/Taluk

 Please receive the number of copying sheets shown in column No.5 of this
statement and sent herewith and credit the value thereof as shown in column No.6
to the respective applicants shown in column No.3 in the corresponding cases
shown in column No. 4 and keep the same in Judicial Deposit. Serial Number Copy Application Number Name of the applicant Case Number Number of unclaimed copying sheets Value of the unclaimed copying sheets
Account head to
which credited to
Copying fee
fundable in cash
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Signature of Nazir, Presiding Officer,
Date: ……………….. Signature and official seal
116
APPENDIX B
REGISTERS
PART I
Register No. Description
I Register of Original Suits.
*I-A Register of Original Suits disposed of.
II Register of Small Cause Suits.
*II-A Register of Small Cause suits disposed of.
III Register of Miscellaneous Cases/House Rent Control Cases/Land
Acquisition Cases/Guardians and Wards Cases/Probate and
Succession Cases/Matrimonial Cases.
*III-A Register of Miscellaneous Cases/House Rent Control Cases/Land
Acquisition Cases/Guardians and Wards Cases/Probate and
Succession Cases/Matrimonial Cases disposed of.
IV Register of Execution Cases.
IV-A Register of Execution Cases disposed of.
V Register of Insolvency Cases.
*V-A Register of Insolvency Cases disposed of.
V-B Register of Proceedings in Insolvency subsequent to order of
adjudication.
V-C Dividend Register
(Registers to be maintained by
Official Receiver)
V-D Register of Assets
V-E Document Register
VI Register of applications for refund of court-fee
VII Register of Process Fee Receipts
VIII Daily Register of Court-fees
IX Court Diary
X Register of Applications for Copies.
X-A Copy Applications-Preliminary Intimation Register
X-B Register for calling for Copying Sheets and Copies and other
charges
X-C Register showing the copy applications ordered to be returned and
copy applications rejected.
117
X-D Register for notifying the dates on which applicants should appear
and receive copies.
X-E Register showing the despatch of certified copies and intimations
in copy applications by post.
X-F Register showing the stock of copying sheets with the Nazir.
X-G Register showing the stock of postage stamps with the Nazir in
respect of copy applications.
X-H Register showing the issue, utilisation and return of copying
sheets and postage stamps in copy applications.
X-J Register showing the amounts to be recouped towards copying
sheets and postage stamps in copy applications supplied from the
contingency.
XI Register of Processes.
XII Register of Applications for return of documents
XIII Record Room Register of Suits, other Original Proceedings,
Execution Cases and Appeals disposed of.
XIV Register showing the errors appearing and alterations required to
be made by reason of the decree or order of the Court in entries in
the Record of Rights and Register of Mutations.
XV Register of un-expanded process stamps and mode of their
disposal.
XVI Central Record Room Register of Records Sent.
XVII Register of decrees of other Courts received for execution under
Sections 38 and 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
XVIII Register showing the commissions issued.
XIX Register showing the Transfer of Land due to Court Sales
XX Register showing the dates of disposal of Original and Small
Cause Suits, other Original Proceedings and Appeals.
XXI Register of Sale Certificates.
XXII Register of Applications for Rateable Distribution.

PART II
XXIII Register of Regular Appeals
*XXIII-A Register of Regular Appeals disposed of.
118
XXIV Register of Miscellaneous Appeals/House Rent Control Appeals
*XXIV-A Register of Miscellaneous Appeals/House Rent Control Appeals
disposed of.
XXV Register of Execution Appeals.
*XXV-A Register of Execution Appeals disposed of.
PART III
XXVI Register of Processes received from and returned to the several
Courts.
XXVII Register showing the work done by the process serving
establishment.
XXVIII Process Server's Work ticket.
XXIX Register showing amount of process fees advanced by .............
Nazir.
XXX Nazir's Current Account of Permanent Advance.
XXXI Nazir's Register of Immovable Property attached or sold.
XXXII Nazir's or Curator's Register of Moveable attached.
XXXIII Daily Register of Return of Amins or Process Servers.
 *In these Registers the nature of disposal of each case may be
shown by the mark "√" made in the appropriate column.
119
REGISTER NO. I (CIVIL)
REGISTER OF ORIGINAL SUITS
IN THE COURT OF ................................................ AT
YEAR 20 ..........
 1. Number of Original Suit
 2. Date of Presentation/Filing
 3. Plaintiff's-
 Name
 Description, i.e., age, religion father's name, etc.
 Residence
 4. Defendant's-
 Name
 Description, i.e., age, religion, father's name, etc.
 Residence
 5. Subjects of claim
 Amount or value
 Date of cause of action
 Particulars of claim
 6. Appearances-
 Dates of hearing and all adjournments
 Plaintiff's Pleader's name
 Record of appearances
 Defendant's Pleader's name
 Record of appearances
 7. Ancillary proceedings-
 Attachment before judgment, etc.
 Orders about security, etc
120
 8. Judgment-
 Date
 In whose favour
 Whether ex-parte or on agreement or after contest
 Relief granted
 Costs awarded
 9. Restoration or Review -
 Number and date of application and orders passed.
 10. Fresh judgment, if any-
 Date:
 Result:
 11. First appeal, Number date of judgment and result:
 12. Second appeal, Number, date of judgment and result:
 13. Orders-
 Affecting satisfaction of decree, Order 20, Rule 11, Order 21, Rule 2, etc.,
 attachments of decree, etc.
 14. Execution.
Application Date of
Order
Against
whom
For what
and amount
if any
Amount of
costs of
execution
Number Date

 15. Return of Execution
Number of
application
Amount paid
into Court
Persons
arrested
Minutes of return other than one of
payment or arrest and date of every
return including entry of order in
appeal with date

121
INSTRUCTIONS
As the column for "particulars of claim" furnishes the material from which
annual statements are compiled, it is very important that the entries in this column
are absolutely correct. In every case after entering the particulars the number of
the appropriate column in the concerned annual Statement shall be noted.
 Every step in the case which has any legal significance and every proceeding
connected with the subject matter of the decree and with its execution is to be
recorded. Reference is to be made to this register whenever any execution or
miscellaneous application is presented in connection with a suit or decree. Any
attachment or injunction referring to the subject matter of the suit whether before
or after decree is to be entered in this register as also any order for refund of
stamps, etc., which will affect the amount of costs recoverable by the decree-holder.
 The result of the execution proceedings should be promptly and accurately
entered in order to afford facilities for checking execution petitions. The best plan
would be to entrust the work to the clerk who keeps the Execution Registers. The
Presiding Officer of the Court should, by inspecting the registers from time to time,
satisfy himself that the work is properly done and is not allowed to fall into arrears.
 In this register two pages are allotted for each suit. The Chief Ministerial
Officer of the Court should be held responsible to see that the register is kept
accurately up-to-date, and the Judge should ascertain this by monthly inspection.
122
REGISTER No. I-A (CIVIL)
REGISTER OF ORIGINAL SUITS DISPOSED OF IN THE COURT OF ..........................AT.............................
Serial Number
Number of suit with year
Date of Institution
Date of Disposal
Transferred to another Court
Without trial Without Contest On reference
to arbitration
With contest Duration of suit
in days
Number of
bearings
Plaint rejected or returned
Dismissed for default or want of prosecution
Withdrawn with leave
Compromised
Decreed on Admission
Decreed exparte
Dismissed exparte
In whole or part for plaintiff
For defendant
Judgment for Plaintiff in whole or part
Judgment for defendant
Contested
Uncontested
Contested
Uncontested
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
123
REGISTER NO. II (CIVIL)
REGISTER OF SMALL CAUSE SUITS
IN THE COURT OF ................................................ AT
YEAR 20 ..........
 1. Number of Small Cause Suit :
 2. Date of -
 Presentation:
 Filing:

 3. Plaintiff's-
 Name:
 Description, i.e., age, religion father's name, etc.
 Residence:
 4. Defendant's-
 Name:
 Description, i.e., age, religion, father's name, etc:
 Residence:
 5. Particulars of claim-
 Amount and Particulars:
 Place where cause of action arose:
 Date of cause of action:

 6. Appearances-
 Dates of Defendant's First Appearance:
 Pleader for Plaintiff:
 Pleader for Defendant:
 7. Judgment-
 Date:
 Result:
124
 8. Review or re-hearing-
 Number of application for review or re-hearing, Fresh Judgment,
 if any, with date:
 9. Revision-
 Case Number:
 Result and date:
 10. Proceedings, if any, taken under Order 20, Rule 11, Order 21, Rule 2, etc.,
Civil Procedure Code.
 11. Execution.
Number Date of
Application
Order and
date
Against
whom
For what
and amount
if for money
Amount of
costs

 12. Return of Execution
Number of
application
Amount paid
into Court
Persons
arrested
Minute of return other than one for
payment or arrest and date of every
return

INSTRUCTIONS
The instructions regarding the maintenance of the Register of Original Suits
apply mutatis mutandis to this register also.
 The result of the execution proceedings should be promptly and accurately
entered in order to afford facilities for checking execution petitions. The best plan
would be to entrust the work to the clerk who keeps the Execution Registers. The
Presiding Officer of the Court should, by inspecting the registers from time to time,
satisfy himself that the work is properly done and is not allowed to fall into arrears.
 In this register one page is allotted for each suit. The Chief Ministerial Officer
of the Court should be held responsible to see that the register is kept accurately
up-to-date, and the Judge should ascertain this by monthly inspection.
125
REGISTER No. II-A (CIVIL)
REGISTER OF SMALL CAUSES SUITS DISPOSED OF IN THE COURT OF ..........................AT.............................
Serial Number
Number of suit with year
Date of Institution
Date of Disposal
Transferred to another Court
Without trial Without Contest On reference
to arbitration
With contest Duration of suit
in days
Number of
bearings
Plaint rejected or returned
Dismissed for default or want of prosecution
Withdrawn with leave
Compromised
Decreed on Admission
Decreed exparte
Dismissed exparte
In whole or part for plaintiff
For defendant
Judgment for Plaintiff in whole or part
Judgment for defendant
Contested
Uncontested
Contested
Uncontested
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
126
REGISTER No. III (CIVIL)
Register of Miscellaneous Cases / House Rent Control Cases / Land Acquisition Cases / Guardians and Wards Cases / Probate
and Succession Cases / Arbitration Cases / Matrimonial Cases.
In the Court of .............................at...............year................
Serial
No.
Date of
application
Name and residence
of Petitioner
Name and residence
of Opponent
Particulars of
application
Act and Section
of Act under
which preferred
Final order
with date
Particulars of any
order made on
appeal or revision
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 _____________
127
REGISTER No. III-A (CIVIL)
Register of Miscellaneous Cases / House Rent Control Cases / Land Acquisition Cases / Guardians and Wards Cases / Probate
and Succession Cases / Arbitration Cases / Matrimonial Cases disposed of
In the Court of .............................at...............year................
Serial Number
Number of case with year
Date of Institution
Date of Disposal
Transferred to another Court
Without trial Without Contest On reference to
arbitration
With contest Duration of case
in days
Application rejected or returned
Dismissed for default or want of prosecution
Withdrawn with leave
Compromised
Ordered on Admission
Ordered exparte
Dismissed exparte
In whole or part for petitioner
For Opponent
Judgment for Petitioner in whole or part
Judgment for opponents
Contested
Uncontested
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
_____________
128
REGISTER No. IV (CIVIL)
Register of Execution Cases
In the Court of .............................at...............year................ Year 19.........
Serial
No.
Date of
application
Name of
suit with
year
Name of
Decree
holder
Name of
judgment
debtor
Date and
nature of
decree
Number and date of
last proceeding
application (if any)
Amount of
decree still
unsatisfied
The mode in which
the assistance of the
Court is sought
Final order
with date
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
 _____________
129
REGISTER No. IV-A (CIVIL)
Register of Execution Cases Disposed of
In the Court of .............................at...............
Serial No. with date of disposal
Number of execution application with year
Transferred to another court
Satisfaction obtained in full
Satisfaction obtained in part
Wholly in fructuous
Amount realized
Judgment-debtor imprisoned
Judgment debtor arrested but released
Movable
property Immovable property Possession given
Sold
Attached but subsequently released
Sold
Dealt with under Order 21, Rule 83
Attached but subsequently released
of movables
of immovable
Specific performance enforced
Partition effected
Execution otherwise effected
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
___________
130
REGISTER No. V (CIVIL)
Register of Insolvency Cases
In the Court of .............................at............... Year 20.........
Number of
Insolvency
case
Date of
receipt on
the file by
institution
or transfer
Number
of
connecte
d suit or
petition,
if any
Name and
descriptio
n of
petitioner
and name
of his
pleader
Name and
descriptio
n of
opponent
and name
of his
pleader
Name and
descriptions of
all other parties
interested in the
proceeding and
names of their
pleaders
Particulars
of
circumstan
ces under
which the
petition is
presented
Total
extent of
the
debtor's
assets and
liabilities
Date
fixed for
hearing
Date of
Disposal
and
order
Number
of
appeal
with
result
and date
Number
of
revision
case
with
result
and
date
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
INSTRUCTIONS
 1. In column 4, state if the petitioner is the debtor or the creditor. In the case of a judgment debtor, if he is under arrest or
imprisonment or if there is an order of attachment against his property subsisting, the fact should be mentioned.
 2. Is there is a substitution of petitioner the name of the new petitioner should also be mentioned.
 3. Petitions taken up as summary cases should be so entered in column 1.
______
131
REGISTER No. V-A (CIVIL)
Register of Insolvency Cases disposed of In the Court of ....................at................Year 20..............
Serial Number
Number of the Insolvency case disposed of
Number of connected suit or petition, if any
Date of receipt on the file by Institution, transfer or otherwise
Date of appointment of interim Receiver, if any
Date of disposal
Transferred, withdrawn or not prosecuted
Scheme of composition approved without previous orders of
adjudication
How disposed of
Actual number of days occupied in the disposal of the
application
Remarks
Order of adjudication made Dismissed
Debtor's petition Creditor's petition Debtor's petition Creditor's petition
Receiver being
appointed at the time
of adjudication
No Receiver being appointed at the time of
adjudication
Receiver being
appointed at the time
of adjudication
Official Receiver
Special Receiver
Official Receiver
Special Receiver
No Receiver being appointed at the time of
adjudication
Penal proceedings not being taken
Senctence of Imprisonment being passed
With compensation to debtor
Without compensation to debtor
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Instructions:- The date to be entered in column 4 will always be the latest date. In the case of petitions restored to file, the date of
original institution should be entered, and the date of restoration noted in the column of remarks.
132
REGISTER NO. V-B (CIVIL)
 Register of Proceedings in Insolvency subsequent to order of adjudications.
IN THE COURT OF ................................................ AT YEAR 20 ..........
 1. Serial number
 2. Date of order of adjudication
 3. Number of Insolvency Case
 4. Subsequent orders affecting the order of adjudication
 (i) Adjudication rescinded -
 Proceedings stayed
 Petition dismissed
 (ii) Adjudication annulled
 5. Schedule of creditors-
 Date of framing of schedule
 Order adding creditor not in schedule with date
 Order expunging debt improperly included with date
 6. Discharge
 Date within which discharge must be applied for-
 Date of application.................................
 Date of order-
 Refusing discharge...........................
 Suspending discharge......................
 Granting conditional discharge.................
 Granting absolute discharge.....................
 7. Administration of property-
 (i) Date of appointment of Receiver
 (ii) Receiver/Official/Special-
 Name and occupation
 Amount of security
 Remuneration fixed
 (iii) Number of estates placed in charge of Receiver or under Court's
 management if there is no Receiver
133
 (iv) Insolvent appointed to superintend management-
 Date
 Allowance fixed
 (v) Amount of creditor's claim-
 Admitted
 Disallowed
 8. Penal provisions enforced:-
 Debtor dealt with under Section 69-
 Nature of misconduct
 [Clause (a) (b) or (c)]
 Period of imprisonment
 Debtor sent before Magistrate under Section 72-
 Date of order
 Result of trial
 Action taken against Receiver under Section 56(4)-
 Nature of default
 (Clause (a), (b) or (c)]
 Steps taken................
 Date.........................
 Result......................
 9. Appeals....................
Number Date of order
Appealed from
Order appealed
against
Date of
disposal
Result

 10. Revision Cases.......................
Number Date of order
under revision
Order under
revision
Date of
disposal
Result

134
REGISTER No. V-C (CIVIL)
Dividend Register
Petition No ........................
In the matter of the petition of .................................. an Insolvent Debtor
Number Names of creditors Amount of debts First dividend at .......... percent by order of Court of Second dividend at .......... percent by order of Court of Signature of creditor or his agent Signature of identifying attestors Thumb impression of payee, if necessary Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P.
_____________________
135
REGISTER No. V-D (CIVIL)
Register of Assets
Number of Case
and name of
Court
Date of vesting
order
Name of
insolvent
Description of
property as per
schedule
Estimated value Amount realised Date of realisation Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 Rs. P. Rs. P.
________________
136
REGISTER No. V-E (CIVIL)
Document Register
No......................20..............
In the matter of the petition of ...............................................................................an insolvent debtor
Date From whom Description of
documents
When returned and the
signature of the recipient
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5
____________________
137
REGISTER NO. VI (CIVIL)
Register of applications for refund of Court Fee
In the Court of ................ at .....................
Serial
Number
Number of suit
case or appeal
Name of plaintiff,
appellant or
petitioner
Date of
Judgment
or order
Date of
application
(if any) for
refund
Amount of
refund
sanctioned
Date of
issue of
certificate
Signature of payee
with receipt stamp
when the amount of
refund exceed Rs.20
Initials of
Judge
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
_________________
138
REGISTER No. VII (CIVIL)
REGISTER OF PROCESS FEE RECEIPTS
In the Court of ..............................................................................at....................................
Date Number
and
nature of
case
Name of
party
applying
for
process
Receipts
Fees realised on account of
Summons to defendant Summons to witness Warrant of arrest Proclamation of
attachment or sale
Warrant of attachment of
movable or immovable
Number
of
process
Amount of
fees
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
Number
of
process
Amount of
fees
Number
of
process
Amount of
fees
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P.
Receipts Amount
of fees
not
utilised
with
reason
therefor
Amount
and
date of
refund
Date of
judgment
or final
order
Date on
which
destroyed
Fees realised on account of
Warrant of delivery
of possession
Warrant of sale of
movable property
Warrant of sale of
immovable property
Injunction order or
notice not otherwise
provided for
Total
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
Number
of
process
Amount
of fees
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
 Rs, P. Rs, P. Rs, P. Rs, P. Rs, P.
Note:- Process received from other Courts for service to be entered herein as well as the Process of the Court to which the Register belongs.
139
REGISTER No. VIII (CIVIL) (R.P. 14, 235)
Daily Register of Court Fees
In the Court of ..................................at....................
Serial
No.
Nature of
document and
reference to
connected
case
Name of
party or his
pleader
presenting
the document
Search
Fees
Process
Fees
Amounts
realised on
plaints and
memoranda
of appeals
Amounts
realised
on other
original
petitions
Amounts realised
on interlocutory
applications and
all other
documents not
covered by
columns 6 and 7
Value of
cancelled
Court-fee
stamps on
copies
credited
Total
Fees
Initials of
clerk to
whom
document is
consigned
with date
Remarks
INSTRUCTIONS
1. Only the daily totals of Register No. VII should be entered in Register No. VIII. All the entries in the former need not be
copied in the later Register.
2. No column is provided in this Register for date which should be written across the columns in red ink.
3. When refund of Institution fee is made in any case, the fact should be noted in the remarks column under the initials of
the Judge.
4. Where Plaints and memoranda of appeals, etc., are returned or rejected before registration, a note thereof should be made
in the remarks column, with date of return or rejection.
5. The totals of columns 4 to 9 should be struck daily as well as monthly and annually.
_____________
140
REGISTER No. IX (CIVIL) (R.P. 37)
COURT DIARY
IN THE COURT OF ..................................
Date.................... Day of week.................
No. of suit, petition or appeal Work done Date of adjournment

Note:- 1. The Chief Ministerial Officer of each Court will be responsible for the due
and correct entry of all matters required to be recorded in the Diary. The Diary
shall be legibly written and neatly kept.
 2. All the entries for the day shall be signed at the foot thereof by the
Presiding Officer on each day before he leaves the Court.
INSTRUCTIONS
 1. In the first column the class, number and year of the case should be
inserted and the nature of the proceeding indicated by its abbreviation.
 2. As far as possible, the numbers should be entered in the first column in
consecutive order, and the numbers of the same year and cases of the same class
should be arranged so as to appear together.
 3. A single sheet should be allotted for each day of the month, Sundays
being excluded. But if the space should be insufficient, the day's entries should be
continued in one of the pages left blank at the end of the book, the number of the
blank page being entered in red ink at the bottom of the page and the date being
entered in red ink at the top of the additional page.
 4. The entries in column 2 should be made as short as possible with the aid
of symbols. As the details are found in the file register and the Order Sheet, only
the briefest entry, generally in one line should suffice. The method of making
entries is shown in the specimen sheet attached.
 5. At the end of the entries for each day regarding the work done, insert the
following information:-
 (a) total number of witnesses that appeared before the Court during the day
in all the cases;
 (b) number of witnesses actually examined;
141
 (c) the reason for not examining the other witnesses present if the Court had
time to examine them ;
 (d) the number of witnesses appearing for the 2nd, 3rd, 4th time and so on.
 6. Orders passed on interlocutory applications and the interim dates on
which they are to be taken up should invariably be entered in the Diary which is
not only a record of work done, but serves also the purposes of posting or hearing
book. In the absence of such entry in this register, the interim applications which
might have been posted to dates different from those of the connected suit or
proceeding may be lost sight of.
 7. When cases are posted or adjourned, the numbers should at once be
entered in the first column on the respective dates of hearing.
SPECIMEN
(Vide CI. 4 of the instructions)
Showing how to make entries in Register No. IX
[7th March (Monday))
 Court sat. at 11 A.M. Court closed at 5 P.M.
Number of suit, Petition or
Appeal
Work done Date of adjournment
Ex. C. 18 of .. For copy of decree .. 18-3-19
Ex. C. 28 of .. For amendment .. 16-3-19
Ex. C. 285 of .. For Rev. Ext. .. 16-3-19
Ex. C. 465 of .. For att .. 16-3-19
Ex. C. 45 of .. For sched. of pr. .. 16-3-19
Mis. C. 47 of .. For stating law .. 9-3-19
S. C. 8 of .. D.A. .. 13-3-19
S. C. 468 of .. d. for pl. .. ..
S. C. 694 of .. d.e.p. pl. .. ..
S. C. 3 of .. D.W. not sd. .. 8-3-19
O. S. 434 of .. At request of parties .. 9-4-19
O. S. 32 of .. I.F. for F.H. .. 26-3-19
Abbreviations I.F.Issue framed
 F.H.-Final Hearing
 Frs.-Fresh summons
 P- Petitioner
 d-Decree or decreed
 A-Absent
 D.D.-Dismissed
W-Witness or witnesses
D-Defendant
 Opp-Opponent
 E.P.-Ex-parte
142
REGISTER NO. X (CIVIL) (R.P. 236)
Register of Applications for Copies
In the Court of ................................. at .....................
Serial
No.
Date of
application
Number of
the
proceeding
in which the
document is
to be found
and name of
the court
Name of
applicant
Description
of
document
of which
copy is
applied for
Copying sheets or cash
Date of
production
Additional copying sheets of
cash
Number
Amount
called
for
Date
of call
Date fixed
for
productions
Number
Amount
produced
Number
Amount
called
for
Date
of call
Date fixed
for
productions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Additional copying sheets or
cash
Date on which the original was given to
the Copying Department
Date or Dates fixed for the applicant to
appear
Date of rejection of the application for
non-production of copying sheets
Date on which copy was ready
Number of sheets used for the copy
Date of delivery or despatch by post
Signature of the applicant or
dispatching clerk
Unexpended balance of
copying sheets
Number produced
Amount produced
Date of production
Number
If returned, date of return and
the signature of the applicant
If destroyed date of destruction
and the initials of the officer
Remarks
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
143
REGISTER NO. X-A (CIVIL)
 (R.P. 236, 252)
Copy Applications - Preliminary Intimation Register
In the Court of ................................. at .....................
Sl.
No.
Name of Applicant Date of Application Case No. Last date of
rectification of defects
Date on which applicant should
appear to ascertain the number of
copying sheets or charges to be
furnished
1 2 3 4 5 6
Note :- The entries made on each date should bear the date at the top and shall be signed by the Examiner at the bottom.
_________
144
REGISTER NO. X-B (CIVIL) (R.P. 238, 252)
Register for calling for Copying Sheets and Copying and other Charges
In the Court of ................................. at .....................
Serial
Number
Date for the appearance of
the applicant to ascertain
the number of copying
sheets or charges required
(Vide column 6 of Register
No. X-A)
Name of the
applicant
Copy
application
No.
Case No. Number of copying
sheets/amount and
nature of charges
called for
Last date for
furnishing
sheets etc
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Note :- 1. The entries made on each date (Vide column 2) should be signed by the Examiner at the bottom.
 2. At the end of each day this register shall be produced before the Chief Ministerial Officer who shall sign and date
the entries.
_________
145
REGISTER NO. X-C (CIVIL)
(R.P. 239, 252)
Register showing the Copy Applications Ordered to be Returned and Copy Application Rejected
IN THE COURT OF ................................. AT .....................
Serial
No.
Name of Applicant Copy application number Case No. Whether ordered to be
returned or rejected
Date of order for return
or order of rejected
1 2 3 4 5 6
Note :- The entries made on each date should bear the date at the top and should be signed by the Examiner at the bottom.
_________
146
REGISTER NO. X-D (CIVIL)
(R.P. 246, 252)
Register for notifying the date on which Applicants should Appear and receive copies
IN THE COURT OF ................................. AT .....................
Serial
No.
Name of Applicant Copying Application Number Case No. Date on which the applicant
as to appear to receiver the
copy
1 2 3 4 5
Note :- The entries made on each date should bear the date at the top and should be signed by the Examiner at the bottom.
_________
147
REGISTER NO. X-E (CIVIL) (R.P. 252)
Register showing the Despatch of Certified Copies and Intimations in Copy Application by Post.
IN THE COURT OF ................................. AT .....................
Serial
No.
Copy
Application
No.
Case No. Name and address of the
person to whom the
intimation or the
certified copy is sent by
post
Nature of the
communication
Date of actual
posting or
delivery in the
post office
No. and date of
the postal
receipt, if sent
by registered
post
Amount of
postage spent
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Note :- The entries made on each date should bear the date at the top and should be signed by the Examiner at the bottom.
148
REGISTER NO. X-F (CIVIL) (R.P. 258)
Register showing the Stock of Copying Sheets with the Nazir.
IN THE COURT OF ................................. AT .....................
Serial
Number
Date Opening balance of
copying sheets for
the day
Number of copying
sheets purchased
Number of copying
sheets returned by the
Examiner with Case No.
relating to the copy
application
Number of copying
sheets given to the
Examiner with Case
No. relating to the
Copy Application
Closing balance
of copying
sheets for the
day
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
__________
149
REGISTER NO. X-G (CIVIL) (R.P. 253)
Register showing the Stock of Postage Stamps with the Nazir in respect of Copy Applications
In the Court of ................................. at .....................
Serial
Number
Date Opening balance of
Postage stamps
purchased
Amount of
postage
purchased
Amount of postage
returned by the
Examiner with Case No.
relating to the copy
application
Amount of postage
given to the Examiner
with Case No. relating
to the copy
application
Closing balance of
postage stamps for
the day
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
__________
150
REGISTER NO. X-H (CIVIL) (R.P. 260, 261)
Register showing the Issue, Utilisation and Return of Copying Sheets and Postage Stamps in Copy Applications
In the Court of ................................. at .....................
Serial Number
Case No. relating to the copy application
Name of the applicant
Copy application number
Number of copying sheets issued to the
Examiner
Amount of postage issued to the Examiner
Date of issue
Signature of the Examiner
Number of sheets utilised by the Examiner
for preparing the copy
Amount of postage spent by the Examiner
Signature of the Examiner
Number of sheets returned by the
Examiner
Amount of postage returned by the
Examiner
Date of return
Signature of the Nazir
Serial Number of Register No.X-J, to
which the entry is transferred
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
__________
151
REGISTER NO. X-J (CIVIL) (R.P. 260)
Register Showing the Accounts to be Recouped Towards Copying Sheets and Postage Stamps in Copy Applications
supplied from the Contingency.
In the Court of ................................. at .....................
Sl.
No.
Case
No.
Copy
Application
No.
Name of the
applicant
Value of
copying
sheets spent
Value of
postage spent
Total No. of
corresponding
entry in Register
No. X-H
Date on which the
value is credited
to Revenue
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
__________
152
REGISTER NO. XI (CIVIL) (R.P. 47)
REGISTER OF PROCESSES
In the Court of ........................................................................
To be kept by the Chief Ministerial Officer of each Court
General number of each
process
Number of suits
proceeding and year
Nature of process
Original
Copies
Copies of plaints
Amount of witness batta
etc., entered on process
Date of delivery or
despatch
Nazarath to which
despatched and
acknowledgement
Date of return of process
Number as per Register
XXVI of te Nazarath
Amount due to the Nazir
Date and Number of bill
by which adjusted
Amount of fees on
processes issued to the
Nazarath at the station
Amount of fees on
processes issued to outlying Nazarath
Amount of fees on other
processes
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
INSTRUCTIONS
1. At the beginning of each working day a line should be drawn horizontally right across the page below the last entry in column 1.
2. Below that line the date should be written across the page in red ink.
3. Below the entry of the date every process for which the necessary process fee and batta (if any) are paid that day should be entered in
order in column 1 with the necessary particulars in columns 2 to 7 on that day, except processes for the issue of which some order of the
Court is necessary, e.g., summonees to defendants or notices to respondents on plaints and appeals not yet admitted or any process for
which the order of the Court is required or a date has to be fixed by the Court.
4. If a process is applied and paid for before an order of the Court necessary for its issues has been obtained, it should be entered in Column
1 with the necessary particulars in Columns 2 to 7 immediately the order of the Court on which it can be issued is made.
5. As soon as process is delivered or despatched, the date of that should be entered in Column 8.
__________
153
REGISTER NO. XII (CIVIL)
Register of Applications for return of Documents
In the Court of ................................. at ..................... Year 19...............
Date of
application
Number of Name of applicant
and his connection
with the suit
Nature of document and
whether produced by
applicant, Also its serial
number in the index
Court's order
returning document
or rejecting
application with
date
Signature of party
or pleader with the
date of return
Application Connected suit
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
____________
154
REGISTER NO. XIII (CIVIL) (R.P. 197, 206, 209)
Record Room Register of Suits, Other Original Proceedings, Execution Cases and Appeals disposed of
In the Court of ..................................................... during ...............
Sl. No.
of
disposal Date of
disposal
Nature and
number of
case with
year
Plaintiff,
Petitioner,
Appellant,
Decree
holder
Defendant,
Respondent,
Judgment
debtor
Date of
receipt in
Court Record
Room or
Central
Record Room
Date of
despatch to
Central
Record
Room
Bundle No.
in which
sent to
Central
Record
Room
Date of
destruction
by Central
Record
Room
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 Note:- *1. If there has been any appeal or revision against the decree or final order, the date of disposal to be entered in
Column 2 must be that of the appeal or revision.
 **2. Where any record has been retained by the despatching Court (Vide Rule No. 197) an entry to the effect in
the remarks column should be made in red ink and when the record is later despatched the said entry
should be struck off and the date of despatch entered.
_____________
155
REGISTER NO. XIV (CIVIL) (R.P. 264)
Register showing the errors appearing and alterations required to be made by reason of the decree or order of the Court
in entries in the Record of Rights and Register of Mutations.
In the Court of ..................................................... At ...............
Serial
No.
Nature and No. of
the suit or other
proceeding
Date of decree or
order Taluk
Particulars of the land
Full
particulars
of the error
to be
rectified or
alterations
required to
be made
Date on which
communication
is sent to the
Deputy
Commissioner
as required by
Section 132(3)
of the
Karnataka
Land Revenue
Act, 1964
Hobli
and
village
Survey
No. Area Assessment
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
________________
156
REGISTER NO. XV (CIVIL)
Register of un-expended process stamps and mode of their disposal
In the Court of ..................................................... At ...............
Sl.
No.
Name of
depositor
Date of
deposit
Particulars of
process fees
paid in stamps
Case in
which and
for what
purpose paid
Why not
utilised
Amount
of
refund
Date of
refund
Date of
judgment
or final
order
Date on
which
destroyed
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
INSTRUCTIONS
 1. When a refund of unused stamps is claimed and allowed in a pending suit or proceeding, the entries in respect of such stamps
should be made in the register when allowing the refund.
 2. The clerk that draws up tables of costs in decrees or orders should enter all unused process stamps in the register when
drawing up such tables, leaving columns, 6, 7, 9 and 10 blank, to be filled up when refunds are made or stamps destroyed.
 3. A remark, stating the value of unused stamps in a file, should be made when handing over the file after disposal to the clerk in
charge of records, and the record-keeper should be responsible for getting an order for destruction of stamps lying unclaimed
after the prescribed period.
____________
157
REGISTER NO. XVI (CIVIL) (R.P. 200, 208)
Central Record Room Register of Records Sent
Nature of the
case with name
of Court Names of Parties
No. and date of
requisition and by
whom made
Date and No. of entry in "To" register
of the Central Record Room
Date when record was received
back
No. of case
1 2 3 4 5
___________
158
REGISTER NO. XVII (CIVIL)
Register of Decrees of other Courts received for execution under Section 38 and 39 of the Code of Civil Procedure
In the Court of ................................at................................ year........................
Date of
receipt
Serial
No.
Name of the
decreeing Court
No. of suit
on the file
of that
Court
No. of connected
execution or
miscellaneous
application, if any,
presented in this
Court
Lower Court
for which
sent for
execution
Nature and date
of
communication
to the decreeing
Court (Vide
Section 41
C.P.C)
Amount of
postage, if any,
received
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
 Rs. P.
_________________
159
REGISTER NO. XVIII (CIVIL)
Register Showing the commissions issued
In the Court of ................................at................................ year 20...............
Sl.
No.
Number of
the suit or
proceeding
Name of
Commissioner
Occupation
and residence
Nature of
the
Commission
Date of
issue
Date of
return Fee fixed Acknowledgement of Commissioner Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Rs. P.
___________________
160
REGISTER NO. XIX (CIVIL)
Register showing the Transfers of land due to Court Sales
In the Court of ...............................at........................year 20.................
Serial Number
Number of the suit and execution
case
Taluk
Hobli and village
Registered occupant or owner
Purchaser
Survey No.
Area
Assessment if any
Date of sale
Date of confirmation of sale
Date of sale Certificate
Date of cancellation of sale, if any
Date of delivery
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Note:- 1. In column 5, if the name of the registered occupant or owner is not available, the name of the judgment-debtor may
be given.
 2. When sales are of undivided shares or portions of a survey number, the fact must be noted in the column of
Remarks.
_____________
161
REGISTER NO. XX (CIVIL)
Register showing the dates of disposal of original and Small Cause Suits, other Original Proceedings and Appeals
In the Court of ...................................... at ………………………
1966 1967 1968 1969 1970
Serial No.
O.S.
S.C.
Other Proceedings
Appeals
O.S.
S.C.
Other Proceedings
Appeals
O.S.
S.C.
Other Proceedings
Appeals
O.S.
S.C.
Other Proceedings
Appeals
O.S.
S.C.
Other Proceedings
Appeals
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Note:- 1. The Chief Ministerial Officer of each Court will be held responsible for the entry of dates of disposal every day as cases are disposed of by
reference to the Court Diary and for the correctness of such entries. The book should be legibly written and neatly kept. This should be kept
open for the litigant public and care should be taken to see that pages or neither torn or spoiled.
 2. The Record Keeper of the Central Record Room will maintain a similar register for each Court in the division and the entries therein should
be made from the monthly disposal lists received along with the bundle of disposed of records.
 3. The column for ‘other proceedings’ is meant for the original proceedings coming under sub-rule (4) of Rule 5. This column may be divided into
as many sub-columns as are necessary to cover each of the categories of proceedings dealt with in the court. These instructions apply mutatis
mutandis to Appeals.
162
REGISTER NO. XXI (CIVIL)
Register of Sale Certificate
In the Court of ...............................at........................year ………….. 20.................
Date of application
Number of
Name of applicant and Pleader, if
any
Value of stamp paper produced
with date of production
Amount of sale
Date of sale
Date of confirmation of sale
Certificate
Application
Connected suit
When ready
When copy despatched to
the Sub-Registrar
When delivered to party
Party's signature for receipt
(with date)
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
__________________
163
REGISTER NO. XXII (CIVIL)
Register of Applications for Rateable Distribution
In the Court of ...............................at........................year 20................
Judgment debtor's name
Amount available for retable distribution
Execution case (with number of suit) in
which assests are realised
Other execution cases (with number of
suits) in which rateable distribution is
claimed
Name of decree-holder
Names of the decree-holders claiming
rateable distribution
Date when assets received in court
Dates of applications for rateable
distribution
Amount of decree in respect of which
the decree holder is entitled to rateable
distribution
Amount to which the decree-holder is
entitled by rateable distribution
Date of Judge's order for distribution
Total to be distributed among the
decree-holders
Balance if any, to be paid to the
Judgment-debtor
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
INSTRUCTIONS
1. One page of the Register should be used for each execution Case in respect of the assets in which rateable distribution is claimed
2. The Execution Case should be entered as soon as a claim for rateable distribution is made in respect of it, the details for the claim
being entered at the same time and the entries being initialled by the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court.
3. Subsequent applications for rateable distribution in the main Execution Case should be entered as soon as they are received and the
entries should be initialled by the Chief Ministerial Officer of the Court.
4. The entries in column 7 should be in accordance with the order of the Judge for distribution.
164
REGISTER NO. XXIII (CIVIL)
Register of Regular Appeals
In the Court of ...............................at........................year 20.................
Date of presentation
Number of Appeal
Appellant Respondent Decree appealed from Appearance Judgment
Name
Description
Residence
Name
Description
Residence
Of what court
Number of original suit
Particulars
Amount or value
Date for parties to appear
Appellant
Respondent
Date
Confirmed, reversed or altered
For what amount
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
______________
165
REGISTER NO. XXIII-A (CIVIL)
Register of Regular Appeals disposed of
In the Court of ...................................................at........................
Serial number
Number of appeal with year
Date of institution
Date of disposal
Transferred to another court
Appeal dismissed without notice
to respondent
Dismissed for default or want of
prosecution
Heard ex-parte Contested
Confirmed
Modified
Reversed
Remanded
Confirmed
Modified
Reversed
Remanded
Duration of appeal in days
Memorandum of objection filed
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
_______________
166
REGISTER NO. XXIV (CIVIL)
Register of Miscellaneous Appeals/House Rent Control Appeals
In the Court of ...................................................at........................ Year 20...........
Date of Institution
No. of appeal
Name and Description of
appellant
Name and description of
Respondent
Order appealed from
Date fixed for hearing
Final order
Of what court
Number of original
proceeding
Nature of original
proceeding
Date
Original order
confirmed, reversed
or modified
Costs
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
_______________
167
REGISTER NO. XXV-A (CIVIL)
Register of Miscellaneous Appeals/House Rent Control Appeals disposed of
In the Court of ...................................................at........................
Serial number
Number of appeal with year
Date of institution
Date of disposal
Transferred to another court
Appeal dismissed without notice
to respondent
Dismissed for default or want of
prosecution
Heard ex-parte Contested
Confirmed
Modified
Reversed
Remanded
Confirmed
Modified
Reversed
Remanded
Duration of appeal in days
Memorandum of objection filed
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
_______________
168
REGISTER NO. XXV (CIVIL)
Register of Execution Appeals in the Court of ...................................................at........................ Year 20...........
Date of Institution
No. of appeal
Name and Description of
appellant
Name and description of
respondent
Order appealed from
Date fixed for hearing
Final order
Of what court
No. of case
Nature of case
Date
Original order
confirmed, reversed
or remanded
Costs
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
_______________
169
REGISTER NO. XXV-A (CIVIL)
Register of Execution Appeals Disposed of in the Court of .................................... at ........................
Serial number
Number of appeal with year
Date of institution
Date of disposal
Transferred to another court
Appeal dismissed without notice
to Respondent
Dismissed for default or want of
prosecution
Heard ex-parte Confirmed
Confirmed
Modified
Reversed
Remanded
Contested
Modified
Reversed
Remanded
Duration of appeal in days
Memo of objection filed
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
_______________
170
REGISTER NO. XXVI (CIVIL)
Register of Processes Received from and returned to the several Courts Nazarath of the Court of ............................... at ..............
General number of each
process
Court number of process
in Register XI and the
date of its receipts
Suit or proceeding and
year
Court by which sent
Nature of process
Amount of process fee
levied
Witness batta, etc.,
entered on process
Date of issue
Name of process server or
amin
Date of return of the
process
Due date for return of
process
Date of actual return of
process by process server
Date of return of the
same to the Court
Amount of batta etc.,
actually expended
By what bill adjusted
Amount of unexpended
batt, etc.,
Date of recovery from
process server
Total number of processes
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 10A 10B 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
 Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P.
Note.- For calculating the number of process any number of process issued on behalf of the same party of the same description at the same
time in the same suit or proceeding and executed in the same town or village shall be treated as one process only.
______________
171
REGISTER NO. XXVII (CIVIL)
Register showing the work done by the process serving establishment at................................................................
............................................................ on work tickets returned during the month of .........................20................
Serial Number
Name and grade of amin or process
server
Number of days
Circle in which the server did work
Number of work tickets returned
Number of summonses and notices Number of warrants
At head quarters otherwise than
on service
On town service
On mofussil service
Given for service
Served on person or agent
Affixed on house
Returned unserved
Given for execution
Executed or in which execution
became unnecessary on account
of payment by judgment debtor,
etc.,
Returned unexecuted
Number of miles travelled
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
________________
172
REGISTER NO. XXVIII (CIVIL)
Process Server's Work Ticket
Name of amin
or process
server
Name of
village in
which process
is to be served
Name of
person to be
served
Serial number
in Register
No.XXVI and
name of Court
Nature of
process
Money sent
with the
process
Signature of
amin or
process server
Date of
departure of
server
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Date fixed for server's
return
Date on which server
actually returned
Particulars regarding
service or non-service
of process and disposal
or return of money
Number of miles travelled
by the server
Date and initials of
the Nazir with the
amount of returned
diet money, if any
9 10 11 12 13
___________
173
REGISTER NO. XXIX (CIVIL)
No. of Bill
Amount of process fees advanced by ................................... Nazir of ............................
To
 The Chief Ministerial Officer of ..............................Court
General number of
process in
Register XXVI
General number of
process in Register
XI
Number of suit
or proceeding Nature of process Amount due Rs. Ps. Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6
____________________
174
REGISTER NO. XXX (CIVIL)
Nazir's Current Account of Permanent Advance
Date
General number of
process in
Register No. XXVI
Nature of
expenditure or
receipt
Receipt Expenditure Amount on hand Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 Rs. Ps. Rs. Ps. Rs. Ps.
________________
175
REGISTER NO. XXXI (CIVIL)
Nazir's Register of Immovable Property attached or sold
In the Court of ............................. at ..........................
No. of suit and
Execution
Case
Date of
attachment
Description of
property and where
situated
Orders affecting it
prior to sale or
release
Whether sold or
released and
when
Amount of
sale
proceeds
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Note: 1. This Register shall be kept by every Processor Nazir.
 2. The Register shall be examined from time to time by the Judge to whom the Nazir is subordinate and the fact of such
examination having been made together with such instructions or remarks as may appear necessary shall be entered
by the Judge in his own handwriting.
__________________
176
REGISTER NO. XXXII (CIVIL) (R.P. 121, 124)
Nazir's or Curator's Register of Movables attached
In the Court of ............................. at ..........................
No. of suit
and
Execution
Case
Date of
attachment
Serial
Number
Description
of property
Person
from
whom
attached
Where kept
and on
what
conditions
Orders of
feteching
it prior to
sale or
release
Whether
sold or
released
and when
Amount
of sale
proceeds
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Note.- 1. This Register shall be kept by every process Nazir and Curator.
 2. Whenever a new Register is opened all items of properties continuing under attachment shall be carried over from the
previous register to the new register.
 3. The Register shall be examined from time to time by the Judge to whom the Nazir or Curator is subordinate and the
fact of such examination having been made together with such instructions or remarks as may appear necessary, shall
be entered by the Judge in his own handwriting.
 4. When furniture, utensils, clothes or any other articles which admit of ticketing are kept in the Court, the serial number
given in the Register should be written on a ticket and the same attached to the article.
______________
177
REGISTER NO. XXXIII (CIVIL)
Daily Register of Return of Amins or Process Servers
In the Court of ............................. at ..........................
Date
Names of
process servers
due to return
this day and
dates on which
they left
Headquarters
If not
returned
whether
time
extended
and why
If time
extended
when
due
Total number
of processes of
each entrusted
and percentage
of processes in
which service
is duly effected
Amount
entrusted
before the
trip
Amount
whether
spent/returned
Amount if
any
outstanding
and
explanation
for the
same
Remarks of
the process
Nazir &
Orders of
Presiding
Officer
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Note:- The process Nazir shall submit this Register to the Presiding Officer of the Court at the end of each day and the
Presiding Officer shall examine and initial the same.
_________________
178
APPENDIX C
Extract from the relevant Circulars fixing the fee for Expert Opinion.
GOVERNMENT OF MYSORE
Office of the Inspector-General of Police,
Mysore State, Bangalore.
HANDWRITING EXPERT
(Mysore State Police)
The following is for information of all concerned
1. x x x
2. x x x
3. The scheduled scales of fee for rendering service to private parties is as
follows:
(1) For expert Opinion.- Rs.40 for examination of Documents and
Expert Opion plus Photographic charges.
Photographic Charges approved in Government Order No. P 7956-58,
Police 174-47-3, Bangalore, dated 19th March 1948 are:
 Quarter size Rs.5
Half size Rs.10
Full size Rs.20
(2) For Expert Evidence.- Rs. 20 for each day spent in attendance at
Court (and also)* in travelling to and from Court.
 Travelling allowance be payable as per Mysore Service Regulations.
 (3) The amount calculated at the above scales of fee is to be credited into
the Court at which the party wishing to call the Expert requests for the
appointment of the Expert as a Commissioner for the Examination of the
Documents.
 (4) The party or his counsel calling the Expert should hand over a
"Memo of Instructions" in duplicate to the Court, detailing the Writings
Disputed and Admitted, and the points on which the opinion is required.
 (5) The "Memo of Instructions" in duplicate, the Commission Warrant
and the original records may be caused to be forwarded by Registered or if
necessary
179
* The word used in the Circular in this place is "or" but in view of the G.O. No.HA 21011-2085-
Pol.97-5-42, Bangalore, dated 19th July 1954, the words "and also" are mentioned instead, in
this extract.
Insured Post to the "Officer-in-charge, Scientific Laboratory, (C.I.D. in Mysore),
Cenotoph Road, Bangalore-2".
 (6) The Examination of Documents is conducted by the Expert in the
Laboratory only. Requests for Examination of Documents in the premises of
Courts, Offices, are not undertaken.
 (7) Sufficient stamps to return the Documents by Registered or Insured
Post to the Court or the sender should be enclosed with the letter forwarding
the records.
 (8) The Expert forwards a certificate to the Court or Sender and encloses
a Bill being his charges for the Expert Opinion.
 (9) The amount of the Bill is credited under Head of Account XXIIIPolice, Collection of Payments, for services rendered in a Mysore State
Government Treasury and the Duplicate Challan forwarded immediately by the
Court to the Officer-in-charge, Scientific Laboratory.
 (10) When the Party calls the Expert to tender Expert Evidence he has to
deposit the necessary fee and Travelling Allowances in the Court and on issue
of summons by the Court the Expert will appear and tender his evidence before
the Court.
 (11) The fee for tendering Expert Evidence before the Court is to be
deposited in the Court and credited under the Head of Account XXIII-PoliceCollection of Payments for services rendered, in a Mysore State Government
Treasury and the duplicate challan is handed over to the Expert by the Court
immediately after he appears before the Court in response to the summons.
 (12) The Travelling Allowances admissible as per Rules is paid to the
Expert in cash by the Court.
 (13) As the obtaining and the size of the photograph depends on varying
circumstances, the party calling the Expert should undertake in the memo of
instructions to pay the necessary fees claimed in the bill of the Expert to the
Court as Schedules prescribed by the Government from time to time.
Bangalore,
Dated 19th January 1952.
180
GOVERNMENT OF MYSORE
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE,
MYSORE STATE, BANGALORE
F.P.B.C. 87-55, dated 19th October, 1955
FINGER PRINT BUREAU
(Mysore State Police)
 The following is for the information of all concerned:-
 1. The Government of Mysore in their Order No. J. 1651-52-Pol. 198-06-
08, dated 28th November, 1907, permitted parties concerned in Civil Cases or
any of them that desire for Expert opinion from the Finger Print Bureau in the
matter of deciphering Finger impressions and other work of a similar character
on payment of fee prescribed.
 2. The Government of Mysore have fixed the scales of fee as per
Government Order No. HA 6105-06-Pol. 272-54-2, dated 16th February 1955
for comparison and opinion.
 3. Rule 201 of the Civil Rules of Practice, Vol. I, details the fee to be
levied in Civil Cases.
 (i) Impressions of a single person concerned
 in one and the same case....................... Rs. 20
 (ii) Impressions of more persons than one
 concerned in one and the same case-
 (1) First person........................................ Rs. 20
 (2) For each additional person.................. Rs. 10
 4. The fee for taking photographs is prescribed in Government Order
No.P. 7956-58 Police. 174-47-3, dated 19th March 1948:
 Quarter size ... Rs. 5
 Half size ... Rs.10
 Full size ... Rs.20
 5. The comparison and opinion fee and the photographic charges should
be credited in the Court through which the documents are sent or to a Treasury
under Head XXIII-Police Services rendered, and challan forwarded to the Finger
Print Bureau.
181
 6. Whenever photographs are necessary the amount to be deposited will
be intimated by the Finger Print Bureau.
 7. When the Expert who has furnished the Certificate is required to
attend the Court personally his travelling allowance as admissible under M.S.R.
should be paid as per Government Order No. J 1651-52 Police, 198-06-8, dated
28th November 1907, in the Court on the date he so appears.
 8. The party or his counsel calling the Expert should hand over "A memo
of Instructions" in duplicate to the Court detailing the impressions disputed
and admitted and the points on which opinion is required.
 9. The memo of instructions in duplicate, the Commission Warrant
addressed to the Officer-in-charge, Finger Print Bureau, (Inspector-General of
Police's Office), Bangalore-2, and the original documents containing the
impressions should be forwarded either by registered or insured post, to the
officer-in-charge, Finger Print Bureau.
 [10] Government Order No. J 1651-52, Police, 198-06-8, dated 28th
November 1907, lays down that Exhibits should be sent to the Bureau at
Bangalore for the written opinion of the Expert and Summons for the
attendance of the Expert should be issued to the Officer-in-Charge of the
Bureau only when the Court is satisfied that such evidence is absolutely
necessary for the case.
 [11.O The fee detailed in the Government Order No. H.A. 6105-06-Pol.
272-54-2 dated 16th February, 1955, will be levied from all Departments of
Government other than Police and Anti-corruption and Efficiency Audit (G.O.
No. M. 18052-4-I.M. 27-51-2, dated 8th January, 1952).
 12} Government Order No. P.3267-9-Pol. 87-38-7, dated 23rd December,
1938, directs that in Criminal Cases the fee of Rs.10 be levied for each
comparison of Finger Prints on requisition from Private Parties in Criminal
Cases except the accused person.
APPENDIX D
182
(R.P. 114)
 Copy of the Notification issued by the State Government under Order XXI
Rule 48 C.P.C.
GOVERNMENT OF MYSORE
Mysore Government Secretariat
Vidhana Soudha
Bangalore, Dated 31st July 1965
Shravana 9, Saka Era 1887
NOTIFICATION
 In exercise of the powers conferred by Order XXI, Rule 43 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908), the Government of Mysore points
the Officers specified in column 3 of the sub-joined table to be persons to whom
notice should be given by the Courts of orders of attachment of the salary or
allowances of the persons specified in column 2 thereof.
TABLE
Sl. No. Class of Judgment-debtor Officer to whom notice of
attachment should be given
1 2 3
1. Gazetted Officers drawing their
salaries and allowances on bills
from Treasuries.
Treasury Officer concerned
2. Gazetted and other Officers
whose salaries and allowances
are drawn on cheques.
Officers drawing cheques
3. Non-Gazetted Officers other than
those referred to in 2 above.
Heads of Offices who draw the
salaries and disburse to the
Officers concerned.
4. Servants of Local authorities, i.e.,
Taluk Boards, Municipal
Councils, Village Panchayats.
The Commissioner, or other Chief
Executive Officer of the Board or
Council concerned
5. Gazetted Officers on the
University staff
Chief Pay and Accounts Officer of
the University.
6. Non-Gazetted staff of the
University
